---
title: |
  `0001` Set-theoretic models of double theories
author: Evan Patterson
date: 2026-02-16
bibliography: _references.bib
---

{{< include _macros.qmd >}}

\newcommand{\Term}{\mathrm{Term}}
\newcommand{\State}{\mathrm{State}}
\newcommand{\Param}{\mathrm{Param}}
\newcommand{\Contrib}{\operatorname{Contrib}}
\newcommand{\pluseq}{\overset{+}{=}}
\newcommand{\minuseq}{\overset{-}{=}}

::: {.callout-note}
### RFC status

This RFC is tracked in [#1098](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/issues/1098).
:::


## Summary

Many scientific models, especially quantitative models like systems of ODEs
and stock-flow diagrams, cannot be usefully seen as categories in the small.
CatColab therefore needs an approach to models that are merely set-theoretic. We
propose one that is harmonious with the existing usage of double theories.


## Motivation

Models in CatColab are categorical structures: every object type in a theory
specifies a category in models of the theory, every morphism type specifies a
profunctor, and so on. This design centers *category theory in the small*, a
powerful and underappreciated point of view on modeling. It is the basis of
CatColab's approaches to motif finding, programming in domain-specific
languages, flavored Petri nets, and refining models.

It is also rather opinionated. Not every model in science or engineering can
be usefully seen as a categorical structure. This seems particularly true of
quantitative formalisms like stock-flow diagrams with arbitrary flow functions
and dynamical systems described by general ODEs.

Thus, as has long been apparent, CatColab needs an approach to models that
are merely *set-theoretic*. One way to tell the difference between
category-theoretic and set-theoretic models of a fixed theory is that the former
should be the objects of a (nontrivial) 2-category or double category, whereas
the latter are the objects of only a category. There are innumerable logical
systems that can be used to specify set-theoretic models, this being a focus of
universal algebra and mathematical logic for a century.

This RFC proposes an approach to set-theoretical models harmonious with
CatColab's existing category-theoretic models. The basic observation is that
with surprisingly small changes to the definitions of *theory* and
*model*, the formalism of double theories can toggle between
category-theoretic and set-theoretic models. As a result, we will be able to
reuse and share significant amounts of functionality across CatColab's core and
frontend.

There are reasons beyond expediency of implementation to favor
double-categorical logic. A key reason, as we will see, is that it enables a
simple and constrained form of type dependency.


## Mathematical specification

Let's compare how to configure double-categorical logic for set-theoretic
versus category-theoretic models, starting with the minimal structure and
gradually introducing features.


### Virtual double categories

In the set-theoretic setting, a **simple double theory** is a virtual
double category $\dbl{T}$ and a **model** of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor (of VDCs)
$\dbl{T} \to \SSet$.

In the category-theoretic setting, there are several essentially equivalent
formulations. On one definition, a **simple double theory** is a
*unital* VDC $\dbl{T}$ and a **model** of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor (of VDCs)
$\dbl{T} \to \SSet$ or equivalently a *normal* functor
$\dbl{T} \to \CCat = \Mod(\SSet)$. Alternatively, a **simple double theory** is an
*augmented* VDC $\dbl{T}$ and a **model** of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor (of
augmented VDCs) $\dbl{T} \to \CCat$.

The difference between the two kinds of theories is thus about loose
identities, which can either be defined by the universal property of
units [@cruttwell-shulman-2010] in a VDC or introduced as primitive structure
(co-nullary cells) in an augmented VDC [@koudenburg-2020]. And that is the
extent of the difference.


### Restrictions

Type-theoretically, an object in a theory $\dbl{T}$ is a type and a proarrow
$P: X \proto Y$ in $\dbl{T}$ is a family of types depending on $X$ and $Y$. It
is then natural to ask that the family $P$ be re-indexable along maps (tight
morphisms) into $X$ and $Y$. That is precisely what *restrictions* in a VDC
do, motivating the following definitions.

In the set-theoretic setting, a **fibrant double theory** is a VDC
$\dbl{T}$ with restrictions and a **model** of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor
$\dbl{T} \to \SSet$ that preserves restrictions.

In the category-theoretic setting, a **fibrant double theory** is a
virtual equipment $\dbl{T}$ (i.e., a VDC with units and restrictions) and a
**model** of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor (of VDCs) $\dbl{T} \to \SSet$ or
equivalently a normal functor $\dbl{T} \to \CCat$, recalling that any functor
between virtual equipments preserves restrictions [@cruttwell-shulman-2010, Theorem 7.24]. Alternatively, a **fibrant double theory** is an augmented VDC
$\dbl{T}$ with all restrictions and a **model**
of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor (of augmented VDCs) $\dbl{T} \to \CCat$ that preserves
restrictions.

As before, the category-theoretic theories differ from the set-theoretic ones
only by requiring some form of loose identities.


### Further structure

A virtual double category with restrictions is the most fundamental structure
possessed by a double theory. To this may be added further double-categorical
gadgets, such as:

- extensions
- cartesian products
- other double-categorical limits, such as tabulators
- modalities, such as lists.

Here we will only note that all of these features work equally well in the set-
and category-theoretic settings.


## Examples

Any Lawvere theory can be viewed as a cartesian double theory trivial in the
loose direction, which is useful but not very interesting in its own right. We
give a series of examples of set-theoretic double theories that make non-trivial
use of the double-categorical structure.


### Polynomial ODE systems

Consider the modal double theory freely generated by

- an object $\State$
- a proarrow $\Contrib: \List(\State) \proto \State$.

A finite model of this double theory consists of a finite set of
**state variables** and a family of finite sets of **contributions**,
indexed by pairs comprising a list of variables and a variable. The intended
interpretation is that a contribution
$$
  c : \Contrib([x_1, \dots, x_n], x)
$$

represents an additive contribution to the vector field of the form
$$
  \dot x \pluseq k_c \cdot x_1 \cdot x_2 \cdots x_n,
$$
where $k_c \in \mathbb{R}$ is a free parameter. Finite models are thus universal for
ODE systems defined by polynomial vector fields.

Crucially, composing such models by identifying state variables corresponds
to composing parameterized polynomial ODE systems in the variable sharing
paradigm. For the latter, see [@aduddell-et-al-2024].

We emphasize that in this example, the numerical parameters $k_c$ belong to
the intended interpretation of the models, not to the models themselves. To use
symbolic parameters *within* models, we must expand the theory.


### Parameterized polynomial ODE systems

Consider the double theory freely generated by

- an object $\State$
- a proarrow $\Contrib: \List(\State) \proto \State$
- a proarrow $\Param: 1 \proto 1$
- a cell
  ```tikz
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhybXtMaXN0fShcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX0pIl0sWzAsMSwiMSJdLFsxLDEsIjEiXSxbMSwwLCJcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX0iXSxbMSwyLCJcXG1hdGhybXtQYXJhbX0iLDIseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJiYXJyZWQifX19XSxbMCwxLCIhIiwyXSxbMywyLCIhIl0sWzAsMywiXFxtYXRocm17Q29udHJpYn0iLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJiYXJyZWQifX19XSxbNyw0LCJrIiwxLHsic2hvcnRlbiI6eyJzb3VyY2UiOjIwLCJ0YXJnZXQiOjIwfSwic3R5bGUiOnsiYm9keSI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9LCJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV1d
    \begin{tikzcd}
      {\mathrm{List}(\mathrm{State})} & {\mathrm{State}} \\
      1 & 1
      \arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\mathrm{Term}}"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-2]
      \arrow["{!}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
      \arrow["{!}", from=1-2, to=2-2]
      \arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\mathrm{Param}}"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
      \arrow["k"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
    \end{tikzcd}
  ```
    

A freely and finitely generated (f.f.g.) model with no generating parameters
is equivalent to a model of the previous theory: every contribution $c$ is freely
assigned its own parameter $k_c$, and there are no other parameters. More
interestingly, in a finitely presented model of the theory, named parameters can
be introduced and contributions assigned to them, enabling *parameter tying* or
*parameter sharing* across contributions. Thus, in the intended interpretations,
these models are *more* constrained than the previous ones.

The foregoing examples admit endless variations. Here is a general device to
symbolically describe ODE systems outside the polynomial class.


### ODE systems

Let $\cat{T}$ be a Lawvere theory. For instance, $\cat{T}$ could be the theory of
commutative rings augmented with unary operations that will be interpreted as
special functions like the exponential or sine.

Then there is a cartesian double theory presented by

- an object $\Term$ along with arrows and equations embedding the Lawvere
  theory $\cat{T}$ into the tight category of the double theory
- an object $\State$
- an arrow $\State \to \Term$
- a proarrow $\Contrib: \Term \proto \State$.

An f.f.g. model of this theory consists of finite sets of **state variables**
and of **exogenous variables** (generators of type $\Term$), an
embedding of the state variables into terms, and a family of finite sets of
**contributions**, indexed by pairs comprising a term and a state variable.
As before, a contribution $c: \Contrib(v, x)$ represents an additive
contribution to the vector field of the form
$$
  \dot x \pluseq k_c \cdot v, \qquad k_c \in \mathbb{R}.
$$
Once interpretations of the Lawvere theory $\cat{T}$ and the exogenous variables
are fixed, such a model defines a vector field on the state variables.


### Parameterized ODE systems

Given a Lawvere theory $\cat{T}$, there is a cartesian double theory presented
by

- an object $\Term$ along with arrows and equations embedding the Lawvere
  theory $\cat{T}$ into the tight category of the double theory
- objects $\State$ and $\Param$
- arrows $\State \to \Term$ and $\Param \to \Term$
- a proarrow $\Contrib: \Term \proto \State$.

An f.f.g. model of this theory specifies a parameterized ODE system, where
each contribution $c: \Contrib(v, x)$ contributes to the vector field simply as
$$
  \dot x \pluseq v.
$$
Notice that parameters can now appear arbitrarily in
terms, not just as linear coefficients.

CatColab currently implements "primitive stock-flow
diagrams" [@baez-et-al-2023], more likely to be called "system structure
diagrams" by system dynamicists. There are several ways to formulate stock-flow
diagrams with arbitrary flow functions using the above ideas. Here is one.


### Stock and flow diagrams

\newcommand{\Stock}{\mathrm{Stock}}
\newcommand{\Flow}{\mathrm{Flow}}

Given a Lawvere theory $\cat{T}$, there is a cartesian double theory presented
by

- an object $\Term$ along with arrows and equations embedding the Lawvere
  theory $\cat{T}$ into the tight category of the double theory
- an object $\Stock$
- an arrow $\Stock \to \Term$
- a proarrow $\Flow: \Term \proto \Stock \times \Stock$.

In an f.f.g. model of this theory, a flow $f: \Flow(v, (u, d))$ specifies

- an **upstream** stock $u: \Stock$, 
- a **downstream** stock $d: \Stock$, and
- a **flow rate** $v: \Term$.

The flow $f$ is intended to be interpreted as a pair of oppositely signed
contributions to the vector field,
$$
  \dot u \minuseq k_f \cdot v
  \qquad\text{and}\qquad
  \dot d \pluseq k_f \cdot v,
$$
where $k_f \in \mathbb{R}_+$ is a free parameter.


### Parameterized stock and flow diagrams

As with ODE systems, the theory for stock and flow diagrams admits many
variations. Here's one that incorporates parameters similarly to the above
theory for parameterized ODE systems.

Given a Lawvere theory $\cat{T}$, there is a cartesian double theory presented
by

- an object $\Term$ along with arrows and equations embedding the Lawvere
  theory $\cat{T}$ into the tight category of the double theory
- objects $\Stock$ and $\Param$
- arrows $\Stock \to \Term$ and $\Param \to \Term$
- a proarrow $\Flow: \Term \proto \Stock \times \Stock$.

In an f.f.g. model of this theory, a flow $f: \Flow(v, (u, d))$ is intended to
be interpreted as a pair of oppositely signed contributions to the vector field,
$$
  \dot u \minuseq v
  \qquad\text{and}\qquad
  \dot d \pluseq v,
$$
where the flow rate $v: \Term$ may now depend arbitrarily on parameters.

## Implementation

The close relation between set- and category-theoretic double theories,
differing only in their handling of loose identities, means that this RFC has an
easy path to implementation.

Starting with theories, the most naive implementation could be as simple as
relaxing the `hom_type` method in the `DblTheory` trait to return an
`Option<MorType>` instead of a `MorType`. This would be pleasingly
symmetric with `compose_types`, which already returns an
`Option<MorType>` as the structure is a VDC in which arbitrary proarrow
composites may not exist. Concrete types for double theories, such as
`ModalDblTheory`, could then gain a flag determining whether they will
allow loose identities to be constructed.

Over time I would expect the data structures for set- and category-theoretic
theories to diverge slightly, since the unbiased description of cell composites
should differ between a VDC and a unital/augmented VDC. That, however, is a
separate project. We already have decent data structures for cell composites in
a bare VDC. Extending those to give normal forms for cell composites in a unital
or augmented VDC is an open question about the existing, category-theoretic
double theories.

As for models of double theories, the simplest implementation strategy is to
leave the data structures themselves unchanged, changing only the type checking
and validation logic. In this design, it would always be possible to construct a
putative morphism, but such a morphism would fail to validate when the theory
does not have Hom types.

Other parts of the CatColab system, such as the DoubleTT elaborator and the
frontend, should require little or no changes.


## Rationale and alternatives

As I've noted, there are countless logical systems that could be used to
specify set-theoretic models, and I have no reason to think this one
intrinsically privileged. I do however think it has appealing features compared
to the following possible alternatives.


### Fibered logics

In his monograph [@jacobs-1998], Jacobs takes the stance that "a logic is
always a logic over a type theory," formalized to mean that a logic is not just
a category but a [fibered category](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Grothendieck+fibration). Inasmuch as an equipment *is* a
kind of fibered category, our approach is more a variant of than an alternative
to Jacobs', taking the context to be two-sided instead of one-sided. Though
tastes may vary, two-sided contexts have the merits of fitting well with our
existing approach to categorical models; being useful in situations where the
dependent type *is* meaningfully directed even if it doesn't compose, like
the contributions in our ODE system examples; and entailing no loss of
generality, since the one-sided case is recovered as types $P: 1 \proto X$, a
time-honored tradition in category theory also appealed to in
DOTS [@libkind-myers-2025].


### Instances
\taxon{alternative}

My original vision for "set-theoretic models" in CatColab is that they would
exist one level lower in the system: as [instances](double-instances-2026) over
categorical models. Both instances and set-theoretic models of double theories
allow types and operations; the latter go further by allowing one level of type
dependency. Insofar as the fibered and indexed views of dependency are
mathematically equivalent, one could argue that nothing is gained by this move:
dependent types can be encoded by [display maps](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/display+map) in an instance. However,
there is a big difference between arrows and proarrows when *presenting*
models by generators and relations. Applications of operations are freely
adjoined to the model, whereas type parameters must be explicitly declared. This
distinction was used in the double theory for parameterized polynomial ODE
systems, allowing parameters to be freely adjoined when not specified while
insisting that the monomials on the right-hand sides of contributions be given
explicitly.

I still expect instances to play an important role in the design of CatColab,
particularly in CatColab's yet-to-be developed data layer, as a flat data
representation should better interoperate with traditional relational database
systems.


### GATs

A key difference between GATs [@lynch-et-al-2024] and double theories is that the
former allow arbitrary levels of type dependency while the latter have just one
level of type dependency. Having a single level strikes me as a useful balance
between simple types and full-blown dependent types. That said, when double
theories are equipped with tabulators, mutually recursive construction of
proarrows and tabulators allows type dependency at arbitrary levels. In this
case, the precise relation between GATs and double theories is unknown to me.


## Prior art

A number of us at Topos have had pairwise conversations about versions of
this idea. Tim Hosgood has written up essentially the same approach to
polynomial ODE systems in the
[roadmap](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab-Roadmap/issues/58).

My paper with Michael Lambert on double ologs [@lambert-patterson-2024] shares ideas
with this RFC and is a useful source of intuition and examples. But there are
notable differences: here we envision semantics in $\SSet$, instead of $\Rel$ as in
the paper, and here we are interested in models given by finite presentation,
instead of explicitly by tabular data as in a database. We also currently have
no plans to implement the compact closed structure from the paper, which remains
poorly understood for weak double categories, let alone for virtual double
categories, and is the subject of ongoing research. The next section describes a
situation where the structure of a compact closed double category would be
useful, however.


## Future possibilities

Making ODE systems be models of a theory opens the possibility of
*declaratively* implementing ODE semantics for models of other theories, by
migrating them along morphisms between theories. Just as there are many notions
of functorial data migration between categorical databases, there will be many
possible approaches to model migration. There has yet to be any theoretical
study of migrating models of double theories.

Here I'll sketch an approach inspired by conversations with David Jaz Myers,
who was in turn inspired by ideas of Bob Atkey. In outline, to migrate models of
some theory $\dbl{T}$ into ODEs, one first $\Sigma$-migrates into a larger theory
containing both $\dbl{T}$ and the theory of ODEs, then $\Delta$-migrates into the
theory of ODEs. The intermediate theory additionally contains "builder"
operations that will, under $\Sigma$-migration, freely populate the ODE with
variables and contributions. The technique is illustrated by the following
example.


### Lotka-Volterra ODE semantics for graphs

\newcommand{\thGraph}{\dbl{T}_\mathrm{Gph}}
\newcommand{\thODE}{\dbl{T}_\mathrm{ODE}}
\newcommand{\thLV}{\dbl{T}_\mathrm{LV}}

We construct the Lotka-Volterra ODE semantics [@aduddell-et-al-2024] for graphs by
a two-stage model migration. For simplicity, we use ordinary graphs rather than
signed ones. So, let $\thGraph$ be the non-unital double theory of graphs, i.e.,
the theory freely generated by an object $V$ and a proarrow $E: V \proto V$.
Let $\thODE$ be the theory of ODEs described above.

Present a theory $\thLV$ that combines the theories of graphs and ODEs with
following additional generators:

- an arrow $b_\State: V \to \State$, the **builder** for state
  variables

- a nullary cell, the **builder** for growth/decay terms:
  ```tikz
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMSwwLCJWIl0sWzAsMiwiXFxtYXRocm17VGVybX0iXSxbMiwyLCJcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX0iXSxbMCwxLCJcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX0iXSxbMSwyLCJcXG1hdGhybXtDb250cmlifSIsMix7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImJhcnJlZCJ9fX1dLFszLDEsIlxcbWF0aHJte3Rlcm19X3tcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX19IiwyXSxbMCwzLCJiX3tcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX19IiwyXSxbMCwyLCJiX3tcXG1hdGhybXtTdGF0ZX19Il0sWzAsNCwiXFxiZXRhX3tcXG1hdGhybXtncm93dGh9fSIsMSx7InNob3J0ZW4iOnsidGFyZ2V0IjoyMH0sInN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifSwiaGVhZCI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9fX1dXQ==
  \begin{tikzcd}
    & V & \\
    {\mathrm{State}} \\
    {\mathrm{Term}} && {\mathrm{State}}
    \arrow["{b_{\mathrm{State}}}"', from=1-2, to=2-1]
    \arrow["{b_{\mathrm{State}}}", from=1-2, to=3-3]
    \arrow["{\mathrm{term}_{\mathrm{State}}}"', from=2-1, to=3-1]
    \arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\mathrm{Contrib}}"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=3-1, to=3-3]
    \arrow["{\beta_{\mathrm{growth}}}"{description}, draw=none, from=1-2, to=0]
  \end{tikzcd}
  ```

- a nullary cell, the **builder** for interaction terms:
  ```tikz
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=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
  \begin{tikzcd}
    & {\top E} & \\
    {V^2} && V \\
    {\mathrm{State}^2} \\
    {\mathrm{Term}^2} \\
    {\mathrm{Term}} && {\mathrm{State}}
    \arrow["{\langle \pi_0, \pi_1 \rangle}"', from=1-2, to=2-1]
    \arrow["{\pi_1}", from=1-2, to=2-3]
    \arrow["{b_{\mathrm{State}}^2}"', from=2-1, to=3-1]
    \arrow["{b_{\mathrm{State}}}", from=2-3, to=5-3]
    \arrow["{\mathrm{term}_{\mathrm{State}}^2}"', from=3-1, to=4-1]
    \arrow["\cdot"', from=4-1, to=5-1]
    \arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\mathrm{Contrib}}"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=5-1, to=5-3]
    \arrow["{\beta_{\mathrm{interaction}}}"{description}, draw=none, from=1-2, to=0]
  \end{tikzcd}
  ```
  where $\top E$ is the tabulator of $E$.

A graph is migrated to an ODE system by pushing forward ($\Sigma$-migrating)
along the inclusion $\thGraph \hookrightarrow \thLV$ and then pulling back
($\Delta$-migrating) along the inclusion $\thODE \hookrightarrow \thLV$.

This example illustrates the tradeoff between the two-sided contexts in
double-categorical logic and the one-sided contexts of traditional fibered
logic. On one hand, it is natural to regard edges as a directed dependent type
$E: V \proto V$. On the other hand, there should be no need to use tabulators
in this example. Rather, the builder for interaction terms should be a
*unary* cell

```tikz
% https://q.uiver.app/#q=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
\begin{tikzcd}
  {V^2} && V \\
  {\mathrm{State}^2} \\
  {\mathrm{Term}^2} \\
  {\mathrm{Term}} && {\mathrm{State}}
  \arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\mathrm{ext}_{1_V,\Delta_V}(E)^\sharp}"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-3]
  \arrow["{b_{\mathrm{State}}^2}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
  \arrow["{b_{\mathrm{State}}}", from=1-3, to=4-3]
  \arrow["{\mathrm{term}_{\mathrm{State}}^2}"', from=2-1, to=3-1]
  \arrow["\cdot"', from=3-1, to=4-1]
  \arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\mathrm{Contrib}}"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=4-1, to=4-3]
  \arrow["{\beta_{\mathrm{interaction}}}"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
\end{tikzcd}
```

whose domain is constructed from $E$ as follows. First, one extends
$E: V \proto V$ on the right along the diagonal $\Delta_V: V \to V \times V$,
yielding a proarrow $\mathrm{ext}_{1_V,\Delta_V}(E): V \proto V \times V$.
Then, one uses the hypothesized compact closed structure to move one copy of
$V$ from the right side to the left side, yielding a proarrow
$\mathrm{ext}_{1_V,\Delta_V}(E)^\sharp: V \times V \proto V$ as shown.
