---
title: |
  `0004` Internal languages for models
author: Evan Patterson
date: 2026-04-10
bibliography: _references.bib
---

{{< include _macros.qmd >}}

::: {.callout-note}
### RFC status

This RFC is tracked in
[#1212](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/issues/1212).
:::

## Summary

Any pragmatic tool for programming inside categorical structures will allow
morphisms to be denoted using variables and function applications, as in
conventional programming languages. In the jargon, such a notation based on
variables is called the *internal language* of the categorical structure. This
RFC seeks a uniform method to construct the internal languages of different
categorical structures, suitable for implementation in CatColab. The technical
approach involves a two-level type theory parameterized by a modal double
theory.

## Motivation

Several styles of notation are commonly used to denote morphisms in a
categorical structure. Among text-based notations, the most important
distinction is between **point-free** notations, which do not involve "elements"
or "variables," and **pointful** notations, which do. To illustrate, suppose
that $f: X \to Y$ and $g: Y \to Z$ are composable morphisms in a category. Their
composite is denoted in point-free notation as $g \circ f$ or $f \cdot g$, or in
pointful notation as `|x: X| g(f(x))` (to use a Rust-style programming syntax)
or $x: X \vdash g(f(x)): Z$ (to use a type-theoretic syntax).

In a bare category, the most general data that can be composed is a path of
morphisms, and there is little practical difference between point-free and
pointful notations. However, in richer categorical structures, the difference
can be dramatic. As another illustration---still tiny by practical
standards---suppose that $f: X \times Y \to W$, $g: X \to W'$, and $h: W \times
W' \to Z$ are morphisms in a cartesian category. The composite morphism with
signature $X \times Y \to Z$ can be written in point-free notation as

$$
(\Delta_X \times 1_Y) \cdot (1_X \times \sigma_{X, Y}) \cdot (f \times g) \cdot h,
$$

which the reader must exert some effort to compile in their head, in contrast to
the pointful notation

$$
(x, y): X \times Y \vdash h(f(x, y), g(x)) : Z,
$$

which is just the familiar syntax for composing functions. Besides its
familiarity, a key ergonomic advantage of pointful notation is that operations
like copying and permuting, which must be *explicitly* stated in point-free
notation, become *implicit*.

A less obvious benefit of pointful notation is finding [canonical
forms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canonical_form) for morphisms in free
categorical structures. Consider again morphisms in a bare category. Using
point-free syntax based on the standard biased axioms for a category, a ternary
composite of morphisms $f$, $g$, and $h$ admits two different expressions, $h
\circ (g \circ f)$ and $(h \circ g) \circ f$, that denote the same morphism, by
the associativity law. Yet, using pointful notation, it is possible to form only
*one* term denoting this morphism, namely $x : X \vdash h(g(f(x))): Z$. The
pointful notation thus gives a canonical form for morphisms in a free category.
Of course, in this case, it is just as easy to produce a canonical form without
using variables. That's what the
[`Path`](https://next.catcolab.org/dev/rust/catlog/one/path/enum.path) data
structure in `catlog` does.

As categorical structure accumulates, finding canonical forms becomes more
difficult. For example, let $X \xto{f} Y \xto{g} Z$ and $X' \xto{f'} Y' \xto{g'}
Z'$ be morphisms in a monoidal category. In point-free syntax, two different
expressions,

$$
(g \circ f) \otimes (g' \circ f')
\qquad\text{and}\qquad
(g \otimes g') \circ (f \otimes f'),
$$

denote the same morphism, by the interchange law. Moreover, due to the symmetry
of the situation, there is no obvious reason to prefer one over the other. In
the pointful notation of a suitable type theory, this symmetry is broken: of the
corresponding two ways to denote this morphism,

$$
(x, x'): X \otimes X' \vdash (g(f(x)), g'(f'(x'))): Z \otimes Z'
$$

and

$$
(x, x'): X \otimes X' \vdash \letin{(y, y') = (f(x), f(x'))} (g(y), g(y')): Z \otimes Z',
$$

the former is canonical as it contains no eliminable let bindings, whereas the
latter does. This general point of view---that type theory is a toolkit to find
canonical forms for morphisms---is a theme in Shulman's lecture notes on
categorical logic [@shulman-2016].

In short, among textual notations, pointful notation has both practical
advantages, being familiar and ergonomic, as well as theoretical ones, inasmuch
as it can help find canonical forms.

In CatColab, we plan to use pointful notation in several places. First, to
specify equations between morphisms when finitely presenting a model. From the
perspective that a model of a double theory is a *theory* in the sense of
(one-dimensional) categorical logic, such equations are *axioms* of the theory.
This feature is covered by the type theory presented in this RFC. In addition,
we intend to use pointful notation in specifying the morphism part of a morphism
between models, i.e., an *interpretation* of one theory in another, and also,
moving up a dimension, in specifying the components of a transformation between
model morphisms. The details of these features are beyond the scope of this RFC.

Before moving on, it's worth acknowledging that point-free notation is not
without its own merits. Conveniently for computer implementation, point-free
notation can be mechanically extracted for categorical structures defined in any
reasonable formal language, such as GATs or double theories. In contrast,
finding the [internal language](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/internal+logic) of
a new categorical structure---a type theory whose types and terms correspond
precisely to the structure's objects and morphisms---is often a research problem
in its own right. The research problem behind this RFC is that while CatColab
has a uniform meta-logic for (parts of) categorical logic at the level of
*semantics*, we now seek a uniform account of the corresponding type-theoretic
*syntax*.

In addition to being readily available for any categorical structure, point-free
notation is equivariant under categorical duality. Pointful notation, on the
other hand, is intrinsically biased toward the domain of a morphism (its inputs)
and also, to a lesser extent, toward cartesian logics, in which variables can be
freely duplicated and discarded. The further one departs from the ideal
semantics of a cartesian multicategory, the more likely standard techniques are
to break down. Nevertheless, we aim to push a uniform approach as far as we are
able, as providing a familiar pointful notation seems indispensable to the
vision of CatColab as a family of interoperable programming languages.

## Technical approach

In many traditional type theories, especially those without function
types,[^no-signatures] the sorts and operations available to use in contexts and
terms are external data that parameterize the type theory. For example, the
(mainly pedagogical) type theory for categories is parameterized by a graph
[@shulman-2016, Section 1.2], and the type theory for multicategories is
parameterized by a multigraph [@shulman-2016, Section 2.4.1]. In more loaded
terminology, such a graph or multigraph is called a **signature**; its vertices,
**sorts**; and its (multi)edges, **function symbols**. A key feature of the
present type theory will be to internalize the signature, i.e., to make it part
of the type theory itself.

[^no-signatures]:
  Type theories with function types and enough inductive types to generate
  standard data types such as the booleans and natural numbers commonly omit a
  parameterizing signature entirely, under the idea that all other types and
  operations should be built out of the provided ones. In this RFC, however, we
  are exclusively concerned with type theories that do *not* have function
  types, i.e., with the internal languages of categorical structures that are
  not closed.

In fact, we will need to keep straight *three* different levels:

1. Double theories
2. Models of a double theory
3. Morphisms in a model, denoted by terms in an internal language for the model.

The first of these levels will be external to the type theory. That is, the
present type theory, like the original [DoubleTT](0002.md), is parameterized by
a double theory. The second and third levels belong to the type theory itself.
Depending on the double theory, models will be categorical structures like
categories or multicategories; in fact, since they are finitely presented, such
models are given by combinatorial structures like graphs or multigraphs, along
with generating equations. So it is free models, internalized in this type
theory, that play the role of signatures external to traditional type theories.

Models of a double theory are described by a dependent type theory combining
standard and specialized rules. The judgmental structure is exactly that of
standard dependent type theory. The type theory has record types (equivalent to
dependent sums but more ergonomic) and singleton types (to enable model
composition); it does *not* have dependent products, equality types, or
universes. To this base is added specialized rules for the object and morphisms
types of the double theory. All this follows the original DoubleTT, with an
important exception to be described shortly.

New here are two additional kinds of judgments:

1. **contexts** over an object type in the theory, and
2. **terms in context**, or just **terms**, over a morphism type in the theory.

In both simple and dependent type theory, contexts are lists of typed variables,
with the list structure belonging to the *meta*-theory. We depart from this
tradition since our internal languages encompass both unary type theories
[@shulman-2016, Chapter 1] and multiary ("simple") type theories [@shulman-2016,
Chapter 2]; a context may or may not be a list, depending on which object type
it is over. Instead, the list modality of a modal double theory supplies the
list structure needed for multiary internal languages. So, again, a structure
usually external to the type theory is internalized. The price paid is that
operations like flattening nested lists, usually swept under the meta-theoretic
rug, must now be explicitly handled within in the type theory.

Another design goal is that the type theory for morphisms be **cut-free**. That
is, composition of morphisms should be not a primitive operation but an
**admissible rule**: a meta-theoretic operation derivable from the other rules
of the system. Eliminating primitive rules in favor of admissible ones is how
type theory can produce canonical forms. Similarly, the type theory will allow
constructing lists of morphism terms, but not lists of morphism generators. So,
a major difference with the original DoubleTT is that point-free operations on
morphisms like $f \cdot g$ and $[f, g]$ are not part of the type theory.

## Mathematical specification

Turning to the mathematical spec, we develop the three levels introduced above
in the logical order: first, double theories; then models of a double theory,
the subject of the outer type theory; and finally morphisms in a model, the
subject of the inner type theory. That's the only sensible way to write the
document. Still, the reader may find it easier to proceed in the opposite way,
starting with the [examples](#examples) and working backward through the three
levels of the spec.

### Double theories

This RFC builds on the framework for double-categorical logic studied by the
author and collaborators for some time now. However, needs from the type theory
have led to us subtly reformulate the main definitions, so we present them again
in a self-contained if terse style.

#### Almost representability

\newcommand{\VDC}{\mathbf{VDC}}
\newcommand{\arVDC}{\mathbf{VDC}_{\mathrm{ar}}}

We refine the notion of double theory to interpolate between an arbitrary
virtual double category (VDC) and a *representable* VDC (equivalent to a genuine
double category).

**Definition**. A virtual double category is **almost representable** if for
every multicell, every subpath of proarrows in its domain has a composite.

Equivalently, by the universal property of composites, a VDC is almost
representable if every multicell factors through a composition cell and,
moreover, every composition cell can be factored arbitrarily as a tight
composite of binary and nullary composition cells. Thus, while such a VDC is not
necessarily representable---there may be composable proarrows that do not have a
composite---this failure is anodyne in that it cannot affect any multicell
actually appearing in the VDC.

The analysis of an arbitrary multicell in an almost representable VDC reduces to
three simpler cases: (1) unary cells, as in a genuine double category; (2)
binary composition cells; and (3) nullary composition cells, i.e., extension
cells for units. This case decomposition will appear directly in the rules of
our type theory.

**Definition**. The **2-category of almost representable VDCs**, denoted
$\arVDC$, has as objects, almost representable VDCs; as morphisms, functors (of
VDCs) that preserve composites whenever they exist; as 2-morphisms, natural
transformations.

Thus, this 2-category is a locally full sub-2-category of $\VDC$, the 2-category
of VDCs.

#### Simple theories

The most basic notion of double theory is:

**Definition** [cf. @lambert-patterson-2024, Section 3].

- A **simple double theory** is an almost representable [virtual
  equipment](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/virtual+equipment), i.e., an almost
  representable VDC with units and restrictions.
- A **model** of a simple double theory $\dbl{T}$ is a
  functor[^preserving-restrictions] of VDCs $M: \dbl{T} \to \SSet$;
  equivalently, a model of $\dbl{T}$ is a functor of virtual equipments $M:
  \dbl{T} \to \CCat$, i.e., a *normal* functor of VDCs.

[^preserving-restrictions]:
  A functor (of VDCs) between virtual equipments automatically preserves
  restrictions, a not-so-obvious fact [@cruttwell-shulman-2010, Theorem 7.24].
  On the other hand, such a functor need not preserve any composites, including
  units. Both of these properties are intended of a model of a double theory.

In practice, double theories are finitely presented. A type theory for models,
including this one, should really be parameterized by a *finite presentation* of
a theory rather than by the theory itself. However, we leave the problem of
formalizing such presentations to future work.

#### Flatness

Recall that a (virtual) double category is **flat**, also called **locally
thin**, if a cell is determined by its boundary, i.e., if for each possible cell
boundary, there is at most one cell filling it [@grandis-2019, Section 3.2.1].

**Assumption**. The double theory parameterizing this type theory is assumed to
be flat.

This assumption might seem both strong and strange, but it's not hard to
motivate. Recall that the (tight) arrows of a double theory are viewed as
operations acting on objects and the cells as operations acting on morphisms. In
a pointful notation, then, arrows should act on types, which correspond to
objects, and also on variables and terms, which represent elements of types. For
example, a product operation in the double theory should act on types to form
product types and on terms to form pairs. But in pointful notation, types and
elements are all there is! As there is nothing else in the syntax for cells to
act on, any cell being applied must be unambiguously determined by its boundary.
That's exactly what flatness says.

When a double theory is given by finite presentation, proving flatness can be
nontrivial, amounting to a coherence theorem.

#### Modal theories

Besides simple double theories, the other double-categorical doctrine that we
will need is modal double theories. In particular, the family of list modalities
is essential to extract familiar-looking internal languages for "multiary"
categorical structures like multicategories and monoidal categories. For the
vast majority of the examples below, the following special case of the
definition suffices. The reader may wish to take this as *the* definition on a
first reading.

**Definition** (special case).

- A **modal double theory** is a monad $(\dbl{T},T)$ in the 2-category of almost
  representable VDCs whose underlying object $\dbl{T}$ is a virtual equipment.
- Let $S$ be a monad on $\SSet$ in the 2-category of VDCs. A **model** of a
  modal double theory $(\dbl{T},T)$ in $(\SSet,S)$ is a strict morphism of
  monads $M: (\dbl{T},T) \to (\SSet,S)$ in the 2-category of VDCs.

Occasionally we need a double theory equipped with multiple modalities, possibly
related to each other. Rather than defining a double theory to be equipped with
a single monad, a *mode theory* is used to axiomatize the available modalities,
which could be monads, comonads, or other things besides.

**Definition** (general).

- A **mode theory** is a strict monoidal category $\cat{M}$.
- A **modal double theory** with mode theory $\cat{M}$ is a 2-functor $\cal{T}:
  \mathbf{B}(\cat{M}) \to \arVDC$ from the delooping of $\cat{M}$ to the
  2-category of almost representable VDCs, such that the image $\dbl{T}
  \coloneqq \cal{T}(*)$ of the unique object is a virtual equipment.
- Let $\cal{S}: \mathbf{B}(\cat{M}) \to \VDC$ be a 2-functor such that
  $\cal{S}(*) = \SSet$. A **model** of a modal double theory $\cal{T}$ in
  $\cal{S}$ is a 2-natural transformation:

```tikz
% https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMyxbMCwxLCJcXG1hdGhiZntCfShcXG1hdGhzZntNfSkiXSxbMSwwLCJcXG1hdGhiZntWREN9X3tcXG1hdGhybXthcn19Il0sWzIsMSwiXFxtYXRoYmZ7VkRDfSJdLFsxLDIsIiIsMCx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Imhvb2siLCJzaWRlIjoidG9wIn19fV0sWzAsMSwiXFxjYWx7VH0iXSxbMCwyLCJcXGNhbHtTfSIsMl0sWzEsNSwiIiwyLHsic2hvcnRlbiI6eyJzb3VyY2UiOjMwLCJ0YXJnZXQiOjMwfX1dXQ==
\[\begin{tikzcd}[column sep=small]
	& {\mathbf{VDC}_{\mathrm{ar}}} & \\
	{\mathbf{B}(\mathsf{M})} && {\mathbf{VDC}}
	\arrow[hook, from=1-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow["{\cal{T}}", from=2-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\cal{S}}"', from=2-1, to=2-3]
	\arrow[between={0.3}{0.7}, Rightarrow, from=1-2, to=0]
\end{tikzcd}\]
```

This definition recovers the previous one by taking the mode theory to be the
walking monoid. Thinking of the mode theory as a 2-category with one object,
this choice corresponds to the [walking
monad](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/walking+monad).

#### List modalities

The *list monad*, or *free monoid monad*, is among the most famous examples of a
monad. Upgrading the list monad on $\Set$ to a double monad on $\SSet$ creates
new degrees of freedom in how a list of arrows relates to its lists of sources
and targets.

Let $\cat{F}$ be any wide subcategory of the skeleton of $\FinSet$ that is a
*faithful cartesian club* [@shulman-2016, Definition 2.6.3]. Examples of
interest are the subcategories consisting of:

- identity functions
- bijections
- injections
- surjections
- arbitrary functions

There is a double monad $\List_{\cat{F}}: \SSet \to \SSet$ that is the ordinary
list monad in degree zero,

$$ (\List_{\cat{F}})_0 \coloneqq \List: \Set \to \Set, $$

and that sends a family of elements $P: A \proto B$ to the family
$\List_{\cat{F}} P: \List A \proto \List B$ whose elements

$$ (\sigma, \vec{p}): (a_1, \dots, a_n) \proto (b_1, \dots, b_m) $$

consist of a function $\sigma: [m] \to [n]$ together with a list $\vec{p} =
(p_1, \dots, p_m)$ of form

$$ p_i: a_{\sigma(i)} \proto b_i, \qquad i = 1,\dots,m. $$

This double monad is a monad in the 2-category of VDCs, functors of VDCs, and
natural transformations, or, equivalently since $\SSet$ is representable, in the
2-category of double categories, lax double functors, and (tight) natural
transformations. For details and generalizations, see the [math
docs](https://next.catcolab.org/math/mdt-0007.xml).

By convention, rules below that reference the double monad $\List$ without
further adornment are taken to mean $\List_{\cat{F}}$ for any choice of
$\cat{F}$.

### Outer type theory: models

The outer type theory, a dependent type theory, has the standard judgments for
contexts, types in context, and terms in context, as well as for equalities
between types and between terms. We are agnostic as to whether substitutions are
implicit or explicit. Moreover, the outer type theory has dependent record types
and singleton types, though neither are actually needed for present purposes.
For details, see [RFC-0002](0002.md) and references therein.

We state the special rules for DoubleTT in full, as there are changes from the
original spec. In what follows, let $\dbl{T}$ be a double theory.

#### Object types

- *Object type former*: For each object $\cal{X}$ in the double theory, there is
  a type of objects of type $\cal{X}$:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\vdash \Gamma\ \context}
    \infer2{\Gamma \vdash \Ob_{\cal{X}}\ \type}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

- *Operation application*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (F: \cal{X} \to \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer2{\Gamma \vdash F(X): \Ob_{\cal{Y}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

#### Morphism types

- *Morphism type former*: For each proarrow $P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y}$ in the
  double theory, there is a type of *generating* morphisms of type $P$,
  depending on a pair of objects of types $\cal{X}$ and $\cal{Y}$:
  
  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash Y: \Ob_{\cal{Y}}}
    \infer3{\Gamma \vdash P(X,Y)\ \type}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  
  In particular, each object $\cal{X}$ in $\dbl{T}$ has an identity proarrow
  $\id_{\cal{X}}: \cal{X} \proto \cal{X}$, which we denote $\Hom_{\cal{X}}$ and
  call the *Hom type* on $\cal{X}$. Thus the following rule is derivable:
  
  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X': \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer[dashed]3{\Gamma \vdash \Hom_{\cal{X}}(X,X')\ \type}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

::: {.callout-warning}
#### Warning: Morphisms vs morphism generators

We emphasize that, in contrast to the original version of DoubleTT, a term of
type $P(X,Y)$ in the outer type theory represents a morphism *generator* from
$X$ to $Y$. That's why morphism operations (unary cells in $\dbl{T}$) cannot be
applied to terms of type $P(X,Y)$. An *arbitrary* morphism from $X$ to $Y$ is
represented by a term $u: X \vdash_P t: Y$ in the inner type theory.

:::

#### Morphism equality types

- *Morphism equality type former*: For each proarrow $P$ in the double theory,
  there is a type of equalities between *inner* terms over $P$:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P s: Y}
    \infer3{\Gamma \vdash \eqtype(u: X, Y, t, s)\ \type}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  Intuitively, a term of this type witnesses an equality between the morphisms
  denoted by $t$ and $s$.

::: {.callout-warning}
#### Warning: Outer vs inner equality types

The type above is not an equality type in the usual sense of dependent type
theory [@angiuli-gratzer-2025]. Indeed, the outer type theory does *not* have
equality types, i.e., there is no type of equalities between a pair of outer
terms of the same type. Rather, there is an type of equalities between a pair of
inner terms (morphisms) with the same source and target.

:::

#### List modality

::: {.callout}
#### Notation: Lists

We define lists inductively and immediately proceed to abbreviate the notation,
writing, say, $\Gamma \vdash [X_1, X_2, X_3]: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}$ as shorthand
for $\Gamma \vdash [X_1, [X_2, [X_3, [\,]]]]: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}$.

:::

- *Formation rules*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma\ \context}
    \infer2{\Gamma \vdash [\,] : \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \qquad\qquad
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash \vec{X}: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer3{[X, \vec{X}]: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

- *Computation rule, monad unit*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vdash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer2{\Gamma \vdash \eta_{\cal{X}}(X) = [X]: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

- *Computation rules, monad multiplication*:
  
  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vdash \cal{X}}
    \infer1{\Gamma \vdash \mu_{\cal{X}}([\,]) = [\,]: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \qquad\qquad
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vdash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash \vecvec{X}: \Ob_{\List\List\cal{X}}}
    \infer2{\Gamma \vdash \mu_{\cal{X}}([[\,], \vecvec{X}]) =
      \mu_X(\vecvec{X}): \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vdash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash \vec{X}: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash \vecvec{X}: \Ob_{\List\List\cal{X}}}
    \infer4{\Gamma \vdash \mu_{\cal{X}}([[X, \vec{X}], \vecvec{X}]) =
      [X, \mu_X([\vec{X}, \vecvec{X}])]: \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

::: {.callout-tip}
#### Remark: List operations compute

In the spirit of type theory, the rules above define the list monad, including
the monad's unit (singleton list) and multiplication (flattening), by induction,
but this presentation is not very important. In fact, the rules for terms in the
inner type theory will describe lists in an unbiased style. What *is* important
is that the list operations compute: by iteratively applying the computation
rules, any applications of $\mu_{\cal{X}}$ and $\eta_{\cal{X}}$ in terms can be
eliminated.

:::

### Inner type theory: morphisms

We now assume that $\dbl{T}$ is a *flat* double theory.

#### Judgments

The inner type theory introduces two new judgments, both depending on contexts
from the outer type theory.

1. *Contexts*: Presupposing that $\cal{X}$ is an object type of $\dbl{T}$ and
   that $\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}$ is an object, the judgment

   $$
   \Gamma \mid u: X
   $$

   asserts that "$u$ is an (inner) context of type $X$, in (outer) context
   $\Gamma$ and over $\cal{X}$".

2. *Terms*: Presupposing that $P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y}$ is a morphism type of
   $\dbl{T}$, that $\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}$ and $\Gamma \vdash Y:
   \Ob_{\cal{Y}}$ are objects, and that $\Gamma \mid u: X$ is a context of type
   $X$, the judgment

   $$
   \Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y
   $$

   asserts that "$t$ is an (inner) term of type $Y$, in context $\Gamma \mid u:
   X$ and over $P$".

   When $\cal{X} = \cal{Y}$ and $P = \Hom_{\cal{X}}$, the subscript $P$ on the
   turnstile can be dropped.

In addition, there are judgments of equality between inner contexts and between
inner terms.

#### Contexts

::: {.callout-warning}
#### Warning: Contexts vs lists

Contexts are typically defined inductively to be lists of typed variables (i.e.,
variable-type pairs), but the inner contexts of this type theory are constructed
differently. First of all, contexts need not be lists at all. Only over an
object type of form $\List\cal{X}$ can we build contexts like

$$
\Gamma \mid [x_1, x_2, x_3] : [X_1, X_2, X_3],
$$

where the $x_i$ are variables and the $X_i$ are objects of type $\cal{X}$ in
context $\Gamma$. Especially in examples, we will be lulled into writing this
more conventionally as

$$
\Gamma \mid x_1: X_1,\, x_2: X_2,\, x_3: X_3,
$$

but we caution that the latter has no official meaning in this type theory; it
is only syntactic sugar for the former.

:::

##### Core rules

- *Context formation*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer2{\Gamma \mid x: X}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  where $x$ is a variable assumed not to appear in the outer context $\Gamma$.

- *Operation application*:

   ```tikz
   \[
   \begin{prooftree}
     \hypo{\dbl{T} \vdash (F: \cal{X} \to \cal{Y})}
     \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
     \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X}
     \infer3{\Gamma \mid F(u): F(X)}
   \end{prooftree}
   \]
   ```

##### Lists

- *Formation rules*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma\ \context}
    \infer2{\Gamma \mid [\,]: [\,]}
  \end{prooftree}
  \qquad\qquad
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash \vec{X} : \Ob_{\List\cal{X}}}
    \infer[no rule]1{\Gamma \mid \vec{u} : \vec{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer[no rule]1{\Gamma \mid u: X}
    \infer3{\Gamma \mid [u, \vec{u}]: [X, \vec{X}]}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  where in the latter rule, the variables appearing anywhere in $u$ and
  $\vec{u}$ are assumed to be disjoint.
  
- *Computation rule, monad unit*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X}
    \infer3{\Gamma \mid \eta_{\cal{X}}(u) = [u] : [X]}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  
- *Computation rules, monad multiplication*: like the above rule, mirrors the
  the computation rules for the list modality in the outer type theory.

#### Terms

##### Core rules

- *Identity rule*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \cal{X}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer2{\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} x: X}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  where $x$ is a variable assumed not to appear in the outer context $\Gamma$.
  This rule can be interpreted as applying the nullary composition cell out of
  $\cal{X}$.

- *Post-composition rule*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (\cal{X} \xproto{P} \cal{Y} \xproto{Q} \cal{Z})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash f: Q(Y, Z)}
    \infer3{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_{P \odot Q} f(t): Z}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  where the first premise tacitly includes the assumption that the proarrows $P$
  and $Q$ have a composite. This rule can then be interpreted as applying the
  binary composition cell out of $P$ and $Q$. In our application syntax here and
  elsewhere, parentheses are optional; thus the expressions $f(t)$ and $f\,t$
  are identical terms.

- *Operation application*: for each unary cell $\alpha$ in $\dbl{T}$ as on the
  left, there is a rule as on the right:

  ```tikz
  \[
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGNhbHtYfSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcY2Fse1l9Il0sWzAsMSwiXFxjYWx7V30iXSxbMSwxLCJcXGNhbHtafSJdLFswLDIsIkYiLDJdLFsxLDMsIkciXSxbMCwxLCJQIiwwLHsic3R5bGUiOnsiYm9keSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYmFycmVkIn19fV0sWzIsMywiUSIsMix7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImJhcnJlZCJ9fX1dLFs2LDcsIlxcYWxwaGEiLDEseyJzaG9ydGVuIjp7InNvdXJjZSI6MjAsInRhcmdldCI6MjB9LCJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn0sImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XV0=
  \begin{tikzcd}
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{Y}} \\
	{\cal{W}} & {\cal{Z}}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "P"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["F"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["G", from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "Q"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
	\arrow["\alpha"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
  \end{tikzcd}
  \qquad\leadsto\qquad
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash \alpha}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y}
    \infer2{\Gamma \mid F(u): F(X) \vdash_Q G(t): G(Y)}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  
  Notice that the cell's name $\alpha$ does not appear on the right-hand side,
  hence the need to assume that $\dbl{T}$ is flat.

  Two special cases are worth recording. First, for each arrow $F: \cal{X} \to
  \cal{Y}$ in $\dbl{T}$, there is an identity cell $\id_F = \Hom_F$ and hence a
  derived rule:
  
  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (F: \cal{X} \to \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} t: X'}
    \infer[dashed]2{\Gamma \mid F(u): F(X) \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{Y}}} F(t): F(X')}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  
  Second, each niche in $\dbl{T}$ as on the left can be filled with a
  restriction cell with domain $P(F,G): \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y}$. Hence, there is
  a derived rule:
  
  ```tikz
  \[
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGNhbCBYIl0sWzAsMSwiXFxjYWwgVyJdLFsxLDAsIlxcY2FsIFkiXSxbMSwxLCJcXGNhbCBaIl0sWzAsMSwiRiIsMl0sWzIsMywiRyJdLFsxLDMsIlAiLDIseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJiYXJyZWQifX19XV0=
  \begin{tikzcd}
	{\cal X} & {\cal Y} \\
	{\cal W} & {\cal Z}
	\arrow["F"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["G", from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow["P"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
  \end{tikzcd}
  \qquad\leadsto\qquad
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (F,P,G)}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_{P(F,G)} t: Y}
    \infer[dashed]2{\Gamma \mid F(u): F(X) \vdash_P G(t): G(Y)}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

- *Universal property of restriction*: for each niche in $\dbl{T}$ as on the
  left, there is a rule as on the right:
  
  ```tikz
  \[
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGNhbCBYIl0sWzAsMSwiXFxjYWwgVyJdLFsxLDAsIlxcY2FsIFkiXSxbMSwxLCJcXGNhbCBaIl0sWzAsMSwiRiIsMl0sWzIsMywiRyJdLFsxLDMsIlAiLDIseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJiYXJyZWQifX19XV0=
  \begin{tikzcd}
	{\cal X} & {\cal Y} \\
	{\cal W} & {\cal Z}
	\arrow["F"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["G", from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow["P"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
  \end{tikzcd}
  \qquad\leadsto\qquad
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (F,P,G)}
    \hypo{\Gamma \vdash X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}}
    \infer[no rule]1{\Gamma \vdash Y: \Ob_{\cal{Y}}}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid F(u): F(X) \vdash_{P} G(t): G(Y)}
    \infer3{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_{P(F,G)} t: Y}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  
  Consequently, terms $\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_{P(F,G)} t: Y$ and
  $\Gamma \mid F(u): F(X) \vdash_P G(t): G(Y)$ are in bijection.

##### Further composition rules

In type theory, composition of morphisms manifests primarily as the
post-composition rule. This rule should always be present. However, one or both
of the following extra rules related to composition may be needed depending on
the categorical structure at hand. The pre-composition rule, enabling
pre-composition with structural morphisms, is needed for non-planar multiary
languages, like those of symmetric or cartesian multicategories. The let binding
or "general composition" rule, enabling destructuring of outputs, is needed for
co-multiary languages, like those of comulticategories or monoidal categories.
Both rules are needed in languages like those of symmetric or cartesian monoidal
categories.

- *Pre-composition rule*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X' \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} t: X}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid v: X \vdash_P s: Y}
    \hypo{\gamma: \mathsf{var}(v) \to \mathsf{var}(u)}
    \infer[no rule]1{\Gamma \mid u: X' \vdash t = v[\gamma]: X}
    \infer4{\Gamma \mid u: X' \vdash_P s[\gamma]: Y}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  where in the last premise, $\gamma$ is a function from the set of variables
  contained in $v$ to the set of variables in $u$. Here $v[\gamma]$ denotes the
  *term* given by substituting in the *context* $v$ along $\gamma$, which makes
  sense because in this type theory the contexts are a strict subset of the
  terms, i.e., whenever $\Gamma \mid v: X$, the *identity* term $\Gamma \mid v:
  X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} v: X$ is derivable. As usual, $s[\gamma]$ denotes
  the term given by substituting in the term $s$ along
  $\gamma$.[^variable-substitution]

- *Let binding*, or *general composition rule*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (\cal{X} \xproto{P} \cal{Y} \xproto{Q} \cal{Z})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid v: Y \vdash_Q s: Z}
    \infer3{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_{P \odot Q} \letin{v = t} s: Z}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

  where the first premise includes the assumption that $P$ and $Q$ have a
  composite. This rule can be interpreted as destructuring the value $t$ and
  binding it to the variables in the context $v$.

[^variable-substitution]:
  A more careful treatment, not on offer here, would define the two substitution
  operations, on context and on terms, by induction on their constructors.
  Still, it should be intuitively clear what it means to simultaneously
  substitute one set of variables for another.

::: {.callout}
#### Remark: Admissibility vs derivability of $\alpha$-equivalence

Any type theory, including this one, should exhibit some notion of
[$\alpha$-equivalence](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/alpha-equivalence). Here
$\alpha$-conversion appears as the *variable renaming* rule:

```tikz
\[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y}
    \hypo{\gamma: \mathsf{var}(u) \xto{\cong} \cod\gamma}
    \infer[dashed]3{\Gamma \mid u[\gamma]: X \vdash_P t[\gamma]: Y}
  \end{prooftree}
\]
```

Without the pre-composition rule, variable renaming is only an
[admissible](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/admissible+rule) rule, in that
establishing it requires an induction over all possible derivations. With the
pre-composition rule, variable renaming becomes a derivable rule, a special case
of pre-composition given by taking $X' = X$ and $t = u$ to be an identity term,
which forces $\gamma$ to be a bijection.

:::

::: {.callout}
##### Remark: Let binding as cut rule

The let binding rule is none other than an explicit cut rule. So, we should
obviously omit it when proving cut admissibility for a particular internal
language. On the other hand, even when it's not logically necessary, we might
choose to include it on the pragmatic ground of being a standard feature of
programming notation.

In contrast, the pre-composition rule is *not* a general cut rule, as it
substitutes variables with variables, not variables with arbitrary terms.

:::

##### Lists

- *Formation rule*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\cat{F} \vDash (\sigma: [m] \to [n])}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u_j: X_j}
    \infer[no rule, small]1{(j = 1,\dots,n)}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u_{\sigma(i)}: X_{\sigma(i)} \vdash_P t_i: Y_i}
    \infer[no rule, small]1{(i = 1,\dots,m)}
    \infer4{
      \Gamma \mid [u_1, \dots, u_n]: [X_1, \dots X_n]
      \vdash_{\List_{\cat{F}} P}
      [t_1, \dots, t_m]: [Y_1, \dots, Y_m]
    }
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```
  
  where it is implicitly assumed that the context in the conclusion is
  well-formed, i.e., the variables appearing at any level among the contexts
  $\Gamma \mid u_j : X_j$ are disjoint.

- *Computation rule, monad unit*:

  ```tikz
  \[
  \begin{prooftree}
    \hypo{\dbl{T} \vDash (P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{Y})}
    \hypo{\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y}
    \infer2{\Gamma \mid [u]: [X] \vdash_{\List_{\cat{F}} P}
      \eta_{\cal{Y}}(t) = [t]: [Y]}
  \end{prooftree}
  \]
  ```

- *Computation rules, monad multiplication*: extending the computation rules for
  lists of objects and lists of contexts, there are computation rules governing
  the monad multiplication on lists of terms. We omit the details.

## Examples

### Categories

Simplest among type theories are the *unary* ones---so simple, in fact, that
they are rarely considered by type theorists outside of pedagogy. Yet from the
categorical point of view, unary type theories are quite natural, being the
internal languages of categories that do not have products, genuine or virtual
[@shulman-2016, Chapter 1]. For us, they are the internal languages of models of
*simple* double theories.[^simple-type-theories]

[^simple-type-theories]:
  We regret that our usage of "simple" departs from the type theorist's. All of
  the internal languages covered by this RFC are [simple type
  theories](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/simple+type+theory).

As a first example, taking the double theory to be the point, i.e., to be freely
generated by one object, recovers the internal language a bare category
[@shulman-2016, Section 1.2].

### Database schemas

\newcommand{\Entity}{\mathsf{Entity}}
\newcommand{\AttrType}{\mathsf{AttrType}}
\newcommand{\Mapping}{\mathrm{Mapping}}
\newcommand{\Attr}{\mathrm{Attr}}

\newcommand{\Person}{\mathrm{Person}}
\newcommand{\Dog}{\mathrm{Dog}}
\newcommand{\String}{\mathrm{String}}

For a unary type theory that's a bit more interesting, consider the internal
language of a database schema, axiomatized in idealized form by the walking
proarrow, i.e., by the freely generated double theory

$$\dbl{T} \coloneqq \big\{\Entity \xproto{\Attr} \AttrType\big\}.$$

Writing $\Mapping \coloneqq \Hom_{\Entity}$ for the type of mappings (foreign
keys) between entities, we can form the outer context representing a simple
schema involving people and dogs:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\Gamma \coloneqq [
&\String: \Ob_{\AttrType}, \\
&\Person: \Ob_{\Entity}, \\
&\text{first-name}: \Attr(\Person, \String), \\
&\text{last-name}: \Attr(\Person, \String), \\
&\Dog: \Ob_{\Entity}, \\
&\text{owner}: \Mapping(\Dog, \Person)
].
\end{aligned}
$$

In the inner context $\Gamma \mid p: \Person$, we can then derive the terms:

1. $\Gamma \mid d: \Dog \vdash_{\Mapping} d: \Dog$
2. $\Gamma \mid d: \Dog \vdash_{\Mapping} \text{owner}(d): \Person$
3. $\Gamma \mid d: \Dog \vdash_{\Attr} \text{first-name}(\text{owner}(d)): \String$

where step 1 uses the identity rule and steps 2 and 3 use the post-composition
rule. The final term denotes the morphism that maps a dog to the first name of
its owner.

### Promonads

A [promonad](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/promonad) is a categorical structure
with two kinds of morphisms, one of which (sometimes called **tight**) can be
cast to the other (called **loose**). For example, a monad or a comonad on a
category $\cat{C}$ gives rise to a promonad whose tight morphisms are the
morphisms of $\cat{C}$ and loose morphisms are the Kleisli or co-Kleisli
morphisms. As an example of the example, there is a promonad whose objects are
measurable spaces, tight morphisms are measurable maps, and loose morphisms are
Markov kernels.

Promonads are axiomatized by the simple double theory of
[promonads](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-0004.xml) [see also the blog post
@patterson-promonads-2024]. The theory is generated by an object $\cal{X}$, a
proarrow $P: \cal{X} \proto \cal{X}$, and a globular cell, the **unit**

```tikz
% https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXGNhbHtYfSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcY2Fse1h9Il0sWzAsMSwiXFxjYWx7WH0iXSxbMSwxLCJcXGNhbHtYfSJdLFswLDEsIlxcSG9tX3tcXGNhbHtYfX0iLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJiYXJyZWQifX19XSxbMCwyLCIiLDIseyJsZXZlbCI6Miwic3R5bGUiOnsiaGVhZCI6eyJuYW1lIjoibm9uZSJ9fX1dLFsxLDMsIiIsMCx7ImxldmVsIjoyLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV0sWzIsMywiUCIsMix7InN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImJhcnJlZCJ9fX1dLFs0LDcsIlxcdGhldGEiLDEseyJzaG9ydGVuIjp7InNvdXJjZSI6MjAsInRhcmdldCI6MjB9LCJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn0sImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XV0=
\[\begin{tikzcd}
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}} \\
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\Hom_{\cal{X}}}"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[equals, from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow[equals, from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "P"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
	\arrow["\theta"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
\end{tikzcd}\]
```

such that the composite $P \odot P = P$ exists and subject to a couple
equations, the effect of which is to make the theory flat.

In the internal language of a promonad, we can build unary terms while tracking
whether the morphism denoted is tight or loose. Taking the outer context

$$
\Gamma \coloneqq [
  X: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\ Y: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\ Z: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\
  f: \Hom_{\cal{X}}(X,Y),\ g: P(Y,Z),\ h: \Hom_{\cal{X}}(Z,X)
],
$$

we can derive the terms

1. $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} x: X$
2. $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} f(x): Y$
3. $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_P g(f(x)): Z$
3. $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_P h(g(f(x))): X$

by applying the identity rule and then repeatedly post-composing.

We can also invoke the operation application rule with the cell $\theta$ to cast
tight morphisms to loose. For example:

$$
\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} f(x): Y
\qquad\leadsto\qquad
\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_P f(x): Y.
$$

Then post-composing with $g$, using the composite $P \odot P = P$, we derive the
term $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_P g(f(x)): Z$ again but by a different means. We
see now why flatness of the double theory is important: the axioms of a promonad
ensure that the two derivations yield morphisms that are equal in the intended
categorical semantics. We will return to this point after examining the internal
language of multicategories.

### Multicategories

Perhaps the simplest multiary language is the internal language of a (planar)
multicategory. In this highly substructural language, variables must be used
exactly once and in the same order that they appear in the context. The type
theory here should be compared with the *cut-free type theory for
multicategories* in [@shulman-2016, Section 2.4.1].

Let's begin by reviewing the modal double theory of [generalized
multicategories](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000F.xml), to be
instantiated with the list modality $T = \List = \List_{\id}$. The generators of
this double theory are an object $\cal{X}$ and a proarrow $P: \List(\cal{X})
\proto \cal{X}$. There are two key axioms, the *composition* and *normalization*
axioms:

$$
\List P \odot P = P(\mu_{\cal{X}}, 1_{\cal{X}})
\qquad\text{and}\qquad
\Hom_{\cal{X}} = P(\eta_{\cal{X}}, 1_{\cal{X}}).
$$

By the universal property of restriction, the composition axiom amounts to
having a cell

```tikz
% https://q.uiver.app/#q=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
\begin{tikzcd}
	{\List\List\cal{X}} & {\List\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}} \\
	{\List\cal{X}} && {\cal{X}}
	\arrow["{\List P}"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{\mu_{\cal{X}}}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["P"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow[equals, from=1-3, to=2-3]
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "P"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-3]
	\arrow["{\text{comp}}"{description, pos=0.4}, draw=none, from=1-2, to=0]
\end{tikzcd}
```

giving the composition operation in the multicategory. Recall, however, that
this binary cell cannot be directly applied in the internal language; instead,
one uses the proarrow composite $\List P \odot P$, equal to the restricted
proarrow $P(\mu_{\cal{X}},1)$, then applies the restriction cell. The
normalization axiom

```tikz
% https://q.uiver.app/#q=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
\begin{tikzcd}
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}} \\
	{\List\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\Hom_{\cal{X}}}"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{\eta_{\cal{X}}}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow[equals, from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "P"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
	\arrow["{\text{res}}"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
\end{tikzcd}
```

says that the unary multimorphisms of $P$ are in natural bijection with the
morphisms of $\cal{X}$. For the remaining axioms of the double theory, see the
page linked above.

To illustrate the type theory, we construct the associativity axiom of a monoid
as a morphism equality type

$$
\Gamma \vdash \eqtype([x,y,z]: [X,X,X],\ X,\ m[m[x,y],z],\ m[x,m[y,z]])\ \type
$$

in the context

$$
\Gamma \coloneqq [X: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\ m: P([X, X], X),\ e: P([\,], X)]
$$

that is the signature of the theory of monoids. We build the left-hand side as a
term in context $\Gamma \mid [x,y,z]: [X,X,X]$. The right-hand side is similar.

To start, use the identity rule to form the term $\Gamma \mid x: X
\vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} x: X$ and similarly for a second variable $y$. Combining
these, form the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,X] \vdash_{\List\Hom_{\cal{X}}} [x,y]: [X,X].
$$

Apply the post-composition rule at the composable proarrrows
$\List\Hom_{\cal{X}} = \Hom_{\List\cal{X}}$ and $P$ to build the term

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,X] \vdash_P m[x,y]: X.
$$

Next, apply the restriction rule at the theory's normalization axiom to obtain a
variable

$$
\Gamma \mid [z]: [X] \vdash_P z: X
$$

but viewed now as a unary multimorphism of $P$ rather than as a morphism of
$\cal{X}$. We can thus form the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [[x,y],[z]]: [[X,X],[X]] \vdash_{\List P} [m[x,y],z]: [X,X],
$$

apply the post-composition rule at the composable proarrows $P$ and $P$

$$
\Gamma \mid [[x,y],[z]]: [[X,X],[X]] \vdash_{P(\mu_{\cal{X}}, 1)} m[m[x,y],z]: X,
$$

and finally apply the restriction rule again to derive the term

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y,z]: [X,X,X] \vdash_P m[m[x,y],z]: X.
$$

As promised, this term is the left-hand side of the associativity axiom. It
would be written more conventionally as

$$
\Gamma \mid [x: X, y: X, z: X] \vdash m[m[x,y],z]: X
$$

but we caution again that in our type theory, this expression can only be
understood as an abbreviation for the previous one.

::: {.callout-warning}
#### Warning: Non-uniqueness of derivations

There was another, slightly longer way we could have derived the term $m[x,y]$,
parallel to how we derived the final term $m[m[x,y],z]$. Namely, after
introducing the variables $x$ and $y$, apply the restriction rule to obtain
terms $\Gamma \mid [v]: [X] \vdash_P v: X$ for variables $v = x,y$, then form
the list $\Gamma \mid [[x],[y]]: [[X],[X]] \vdash_{\List P} [x,y]: [X,X]$ and
proceed as before to build the term $\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,X] \vdash_P m[x,y]
\vdash X$.

By the theory's compatibility axiom for the left action of $P$ (contributing to
the theory's flatness), both derivations denote the same multimorphism in any
model of the theory. Thus, the type theory is sound in allowing the two
derivations to produce identical terms.

Turning this around, we see that terms in this type theory do not have unique
derivations. While that's not necessarily a problem, it can be a desideratum of
a type theory that any (derivable) term has a unique derivation. For this
particular double theory, we could achieve uniqueness of derivations by ad hocly
prohibiting use of $P$'s left and right actions. The same trick would work for
the theory of promonads. In general, though, we should not expect to have unique
derivations.

:::

### Symmetric multicategories

\newcommand{\bij}{\mathrm{bij}}

Symmetric multicategories are also models of the modal double theory of
[generalized multicategories](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000F.xml), now
instantiated with the list modality $T = \List_{\bij}$. To illustrate, we derive
the commutativity axiom of a commutative monoid as an equality type

$$
\Gamma \vdash \eqtype([x,y]: [X,X],\ X,\ m[x,y],\ m[y,x])\ \type,
$$

where $\Gamma$ is the signature of the theory of monoids as before. We've
already derived the left-hand side, so let's derive the right-hand side.

Start with the variables $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash x: X$ and $\Gamma \mid y: X
\vdash y: X$ and apply the list formation rule using the swap permutation
$\sigma: [2] \xto{\cong} [2]$ to obtain the term

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,X] \vdash_{\List_{\bij} \Hom_{\cal{X}}} [y,x]: [X,X].
$$

Then post-compose with the generator $m$ to obtain

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,X] \vdash_P m[y,x]: X.
$$

### Cartesian multicategories

\newcommand{\fun}{\mathrm{fun}}

For non-planar multicategories, the list formation and post-composition rules
used above do not suffice to build all of the expected terms; the
*pre*-composition rule is also needed. To illustrate, using the internal
language of a cartesian multicategory, we construct the distributivity axiom of
a module over a rig

$$
\Gamma \vdash \eqtype([r,x,y]: [R,X,X],\ X,\
  r \cdot (x + y),\
  (r \cdot x) + (r \cdot y)
)\ \type
$$

in the context

$$
\Gamma \coloneqq [
R: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\ X: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\
(+): P([X,X], X),\ 0: P([\,], X),\ (\cdot): P([R,X], X)
]
$$

that is a fragment of the signature of the theory of modules over rigs. As is
customary, the expressions $x + y$ and $r \cdot x$ are merely abbreviations for
$(+)[x,y]$ and $(\cdot)[r,x]$. We are again working with the modal double theory
of generalized multicategories, now instantiated with the list modality $T =
\List_{\fun}$.

The left-hand side of the distributivity axiom

$$
\Gamma \mid [r,x,y]: [R,X,X] \vdash_P r \cdot (x + y): X
$$

is constructed using only the language of planar multicategory. For the
right-hand side, we proceed as before to build the intermediate term

$$
\Gamma \mid [r,x,s,y]: [R,X,R,X] \vdash_P (r \cdot x) + (s \cdot y): X.
$$

We must now apply the pre-composition rule to restrict the inner context. To do
so, first form the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [r,x,y]: [R,X,X] \vdash_{\List_{\mathrm{fun}} \Hom_{\cal{X}}} [r,x,r,y]: [R,X,R,X]
$$

using the function $\sigma = [1,2,1,3]: [4] \to [3]$. Then pre-compose with this
term, with respect to the variable mapping $\gamma: \{r,s,x,y\} \to \{r,x,y\}$
sending both $r$ and $s$ to $r$ and preserving $x$ and $y$, to derive

$$
\Gamma \mid [r,x,y]: [R,X,X] \vdash_P (r \cdot x) + (r \cdot y): X.
$$

### Comulticategories

\newcommand{\concat}{\mathsf{concat}}

Our first example of a categorical structure with "co-multiary" morphisms is a
comulticategory. This choice is rather silly as a comulticategory, having
single-input, multiple-output morphisms, is maximally ill-adapted to pointful
notation; moreover, since comulticategories are dual to multicategories, any
morphism expressed in the internal language of a mulicategory could just as well
be interpreted as a morphism in a comulticategory. Nevertheless, the example is
worth considering, first, because our type theory *does* furnish an internal
language for comulticategories, and, more importantly, because this language
illustrates features like let binding also needed in more useful languages, such
as those of PROPs or monoidal categories.

We work with the modal double theory of *generalized comulticategories*. I've
not written down this theory explicitly, but it is just the loose dual of the
theory of [generalized
multicategories](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000F.xml). The theory is
again instantiated with the list modality $T = \List = \List_{\id}$.

Consider the associativity axiom of a comonoid

$$
\Gamma \vdash \eqtype(x: X,\ [X,X,X],\
  \letin{[y, c] = \delta x} \concat [\delta y, [c]],\
  \letin{[a, y] = \delta x} \concat [[a], \delta y]
)\ \type
$$

in the context

$$
\Gamma \coloneqq [X: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\ \delta: P(X,[X,X]),\ \varepsilon: P(X,[\,])]
$$

that is the signature of the theory of comonoids. Here we write $\concat$ for
the list monad multiplication $\mu_{\cal{X}}$ to avoid confusing Greek letters
in the signature and in the type theory itself.

To construct, say, the left-hand side of the axiom, post-compose a variable with
$\delta$ to form $\Gamma \mid y: X \vdash_P \delta y: [X,X]$ and apply the
normalization axiom of a generalized comulticategory (where the unit
$\eta_{\cal{X}}$ now appears on the *right* boundary of the restriction cell) to
form $\Gamma \mid c: X \vdash_P [c]: [X]$. Combining these two terms, form the
list

$$
\Gamma \mid [y,c]: [X,X] \vdash_{\List P} [\delta y, [c]]: [[X,X],[X]].
$$

Now apply the let binding rule to the term $\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_P \delta x:
[X,X]$ and to the term above, at the composable proarrows $P$ and $\List P$, in
order to derive

$$
\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_{P(1,\mu_{\cal{X}})}
  \letin{[y,c] = \delta x} [\delta y, [c]]: [[X,X],[X]].
$$

Finally, apply the restriction rule to obtain the desired term

$$
\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_P
  \letin{[y,c] = \delta x} \concat [\delta y, [c]]: [X,X,X].
$$

### PROPs

A minimal categorical structure admitting both multiary and co-multiary
morphisms is a [PRO](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/PRO). However, it seems that
nothing very interesting can be said in a PRO that can't already be said in a
multicategory or comulticategory. We proceed directly to the internal language
of a (multisorted) [PROP](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/PROP).

PROPs are models of the modal double theory of [generalized
PROs](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000E.xml), instantiated with the list
modality $T = \List_{\bij}$. The generators of this double theory are an object
$\cal{X}$, a proarrow $M: \List_{\bij} \cal{X} \proto \List_{\bij} \cal{X}$, and
a cell

```tikz
\newcommand{\bij}{\mathrm{bij}}

% https://q.uiver.app/#q=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
\[\begin{tikzcd}[column sep=large]
	{\List_{\bij}^2 \cal{X}} & {\List_{\bij}^2 \cal{X}} \\
	{\List_{\bij} \cal{X}} & {\List_{\bij} \cal{X}}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{\List_{\bij} M}"{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{\mu_{\cal{X}}}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["{\mu_X}", from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "M"'{inner sep=.8ex}, "\shortmid"{marking}, from=2-1, to=2-2]
	\arrow["\otimes"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
\end{tikzcd}\]
```

Key axioms include the *composition* and *normalization* axioms:

$$
M \odot M = M
\qquad\text{and}\qquad
\Hom_{\cal{X}} = M(\eta_{\cal{X}}, \eta_{\cal{X}}).
$$

For the remaining axioms and other details, see the linked page.

We record the most interesting axiom of a
[bimonoid](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/bimonoid), namely that comultiplication
commutes with multiplication (equivalently, that multiplication commutes with
comultiplication), as the morphism equality type

$$
\begin{aligned}
\Gamma \vdash \eqtype(
  & [x,y]: [X,X],\ [X,X], \\
  & \delta\, m [x, y], \\
  & \letin{[a,b,c,d] = \concat[\delta[x], \delta[y]]} \concat [m[a,c], m[b,d]])
\end{aligned}
$$

in the context

$$
\Gamma \coloneqq [
X: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\
 m: M([X,X],[X]),\ e: M([\,], [X]),\
\delta: M([X],[X,X]),\ \varepsilon: M([X],[\,])
]
$$

that is the signature of the theory of bimonoids.

The left-hand side of this equation is built in the now familiar way: first form
the list $[x,y]$ over $\List_{\bij} \Hom_{\cal{X}}$, then post-compose with $m$
to obtain $\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,X] \vdash_M m[x,y]: [X]$, and post-compose
again with $\delta$ to obtain

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X]^2 \vdash_M \delta\, m [x,y]: [X]^2,
$$

where we introduce $[X]^k$ as an abbreviation for the list $[X,\dots,X]$ with
$X$ repeated $k$ times.

The right-hand side is derived by applying the let binding rule to the terms

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X]^2 \vdash_M \concat[\delta[x], \delta[y]]: [X]^4
\quad\text{and}\quad
\Gamma \mid [a,b,c,d]: [X]^4 \vdash_M \concat[m[a,c], m[b,d]]: [X]^2.
$$

For the first of these, apply the restriction cell from the normalization axiom
to the variable $x$ to make the term $\Gamma \mid [x]: [X] \vdash_{\List_{\bij}
\Hom_{\cal{X}}} [x]: [X]$, then post-compose with $\delta$ to obtain $\Gamma
\mid [x]: [X] \vdash_M \delta [x]: [X]^2$. We do the same for the variable $y$,
then form the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [[x],[y]]: [[X],[X]] \vdash_{\List_{\bij} M}
  [\delta[x], \delta[y]]: [[X]^2, [X]^2].
$$

Finally, apply the cell $\otimes$ representing the tensor to obtain the first of
the above terms.

As for the second term, proceed similarly to construct the term

$$
\Gamma \mid [[a,c], [b,d]]: [[X]^2, [X]^2] \vdash_{\List_{\bij} M}
  [m[a,c],m[b,d]]: [[X], [X]],
$$

apply the tensor operation, and finally pre-compose with the term $\Gamma \mid
[a,b,c,d] \vdash_{\List_{\bij} \Hom_{\cal{X}}} [a,c,b,d]$ induced by the
permutation $\sigma = [1,3,2,4]: [4] \xto{\cong} [4]$.

### Monoidal categories

At last we come to a categorical structure whose internal language has a
non-trivial type constructor. In a monoidal category, we can form the monoidal
product $X \otimes Y$ of objects $X$ and $Y$, the linear analogue of a product
type. In fact, as objects of categorical doctrines, symmetric monoidal
categories (SMCs) and (multi-sorted) PROPs are interchangeable: any theory that
can be expressed as an SMC can just as well be expressed as a PROP, and vice
versa. The difference is between their morphisms, or interpretations of
theories: a symmetric monoidal functor, even a strict one, is more general than
a morphism of PROPs. Such morphisms are, however, beyond the scope of this RFC.
So, rather than recapitulating everything above in the language of monoidal
categories, we will focus on what changes about the syntax and how the
associators and other structure isomorphisms work.

The internal language of monoidal categories having a non-trivial type
constructor corresponds to the modal double theory of [generalized monoidal
categories](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-0005.xml) having a non-structural
tight morphism. This theory is better known as the theory of *monad
pseudoalgebras* or *$T$-pseudoalgebras*, where for $T$ we can take a list double
monad. For bare monoidal categories, we take the plain list monad $T = \List =
\List_{\id}$. The generators of the theory are an object $\cal{X}$, an arrow
$\otimes: \List \cal{X} \to \cal{X}$, and *associator* and *unitor* cells

```tikz
\[
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNixbMCwwLCJcXExpc3ReMiBcXGNhbHtYfSJdLFswLDEsIlxcTGlzdFxcY2Fse1h9Il0sWzEsMCwiXFxMaXN0XjIgXFxjYWx7WH0iXSxbMCwyLCJcXGNhbHtYfSJdLFsxLDEsIlxcTGlzdFxcY2Fse1h9Il0sWzEsMiwiXFxjYWx7WH0iXSxbMCwyLCIiLDAseyJsZXZlbCI6Miwic3R5bGUiOnsiYm9keSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYmFycmVkIn0sImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XSxbMCwxLCJcXExpc3RcXG90aW1lcyIsMl0sWzEsMywiXFxvdGltZXMiLDJdLFsyLDQsIlxcbXVfe1xcY2Fse1h9fSJdLFs0LDUsIlxcb3RpbWVzIl0sWzMsNSwiIiwyLHsibGV2ZWwiOjIsInN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImJhcnJlZCJ9LCJoZWFkIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn19fV0sWzYsMTEsIlxcYWxwaGEiLDEseyJzaG9ydGVuIjp7InNvdXJjZSI6MjAsInRhcmdldCI6MjB9LCJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJub25lIn0sImhlYWQiOnsibmFtZSI6Im5vbmUifX19XV0=
  \begin{tikzcd}
	{\List^2 \cal{X}} & {\List^2 \cal{X}} \\
	{\List\cal{X}} & {\List\cal{X}} \\
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "\shortmid"{marking}, equals, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{\List\otimes}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["{\mu_{\cal{X}}}", from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow["\otimes"', from=2-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["\otimes", from=2-2, to=3-2]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "\shortmid"{marking}, equals, from=3-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow["\alpha"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
  \end{tikzcd}
  \qquad\text{and}\qquad
  % https://q.uiver.app/#q=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
  \begin{tikzcd}
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}} \\
	& {\List \cal{X}} \\
	{\cal{X}} & {\cal{X}}
	\arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "\shortmid"{marking}, equals, from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[equals, from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{\eta_{\cal{X}}}", from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow["\otimes", from=2-2, to=3-2]
	\arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "\shortmid"{marking}, equals, from=3-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow["\iota"{description}, draw=none, from=0, to=1]
  \end{tikzcd}
\]
```

and their loose inverses. The cells obey three coherence axioms.

Starting with contexts, suppose $\Gamma \coloneqq [X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}, Y:
\Ob_{\cal{X}}]$ and form the context $\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,Y]$ over $\List
\cal{X}$ as before. Applying the arrow $\otimes: \List\cal{X} \to \cal{X}$
yields a new context over $\cal{X}$ that appears literally as

$$
\Gamma \mid \otimes [x,y]: \otimes [X,Y].
$$

Following the common practice for unbiased monoidal products, we abbreviate a
product $\otimes [X_1, \dots, X_k]$, with $k > 1$, as $X_1 \otimes \cdots
\otimes X_k$, and we write the empty product $\otimes [\,]$ as $I$. We then
introduce the tuple notation $(x_1,\dots,x_k)$ for the product element $\otimes
[x_1,\dots,x_k]$ for any $k \geq 0$. The context above then appears in more
familiar style as

$$
\Gamma \mid (x, y): X \otimes Y.
$$

We emphasize though that the latter is only syntactic sugar for the former.

In the context

$$
\Gamma \coloneqq [
  A, B, W, X, Y: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\
  f: \Hom_{\cal{X}}(A, X \otimes W),\
  g: \Hom_{\cal{X}}(W \otimes B, Y)
],
$$

let's construct a term denoting the morphism[^fritz-example-morphism] that is,
rather unpleasantly, written in point-free notation as

$$
(f \otimes 1_B) \cdot \alpha_{X,W,B} \cdot (1_X \otimes g): A \otimes B \to X \otimes Y,
$$

where $\alpha_{X,W,B}$ is a component of the (biased) associator natural
isomorphism.

[^fritz-example-morphism]:
  As it happens, this morphism appears as a string diagram in [@fritz-2020,
  Lemma 11.12].

First, form the terms

$$
\Gamma \mid a: A \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} fa: X \otimes W
\qquad\text{and}\qquad
\Gamma \mid b: B \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} b: B,
$$

then the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [a,b]: [A,B] \vdash_{\List \Hom_{\cal{X}}} [fa, b]: [X \otimes W, B],
$$

and then apply the cell $\Hom_{\otimes}$ induced by the tensor $\otimes:
\List\cal{X} \to \cal{X}$ to obtain

$$
\Gamma \mid (a,b): A \otimes B \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} (fa, b): (X \otimes W) \otimes B.
$$

Now, intuitively, we want to apply the let binding rule to compose this term
with

$$
\Gamma \mid (x,(w,b)): X \otimes (W \otimes B) \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}}
  (x,g(w,b)) \vdash X \otimes Y
$$

constructed similarly. But the types $(X \otimes W) \otimes B$ and $X \otimes (W
\otimes B)$ don't quite match up.

To proceed, we must use the associators and unitors to reshape the tuples.
Semantically, this amounts to applying the following chain of isomorphisms

$$
(X \otimes W) \otimes B \xto{\cong}
  (X \otimes W) \otimes (\otimes [B]) \xto{\cong}
  (X \otimes W \otimes B) \xto{\cong}
  (\otimes [X]) \otimes (W \otimes B) \xto{\cong}
  X \otimes (W \otimes B).
$$

Let's put this plan into action. Applying the unitor cell to a variable $b$
gives $\Gamma \mid b: B \vdash (b,): \otimes [B]$. Tensor that with the pair
$(x,w)$ to get the term

$$
\Gamma \mid ((x,w),b): (X \otimes W) \otimes B \vdash
  ((x,w),(b,)): (X \otimes W) \otimes (\otimes [B])
$$

denoting the first isomorphism. Next, form the list of lists

$$
\Gamma \mid [[x,w],[b]]: [[X,W],[B]] \vdash_{\List \List \Hom_{\cal{X}}}
  [[x,w],[b]]: [[X,W],[B]]
$$

and apply the associator cell to derive the term

$$
\Gamma \mid ((x,w),(b,)): (X \otimes W) \otimes (\otimes [B]) \vdash
  (x,w,b): X \otimes W \otimes B
$$

denoting the second iso. Combining the two terms using the pre-composition rule
yields a new term

$$
\Gamma \mid ((x,w),b): (X \otimes W) \otimes B \vdash
  (x,w,b): X \otimes W \otimes B
$$

representing the composite of the first two isomorphisms. Repeating this
procedure for the *inverse* associator and unitor cells and applying the
pre-composition rule a final time yields a term

$$
\Gamma \mid ((x,w),b): (X \otimes W) \otimes B \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}}
  (x,(w,b)): X \otimes (W \otimes B)
$$

denoting the composite of all four structure isomorphisms. Intuitively, this
term represents the function that destructures the nested tuple on the left side
of the turnstile and then restructures it into the nested tuple on the right
side.

To complete the derivation, pre-compose the original term $(x,g(w,b))$ with the
preceding term to obtain

$$
\Gamma \mid ((x,w),b): (X \otimes W) \otimes B \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}}
  (x,g(w,b)) \vdash X \otimes Y,
$$

then apply the let binding rule to derive

$$
\Gamma \mid (a,b): A \otimes B \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}}
  \letin{((x,w),b) = (fa,b)} (x,g(w,b)): X \otimes Y.
$$

::: {.callout-tip}
#### Remark: Comparison with programming notation

While this derivation was rather long, it is the job of the type checker, not
the programmer, to check that a given term has a valid derivation. The term
itself is short and readable. In fact, it is nearly identical to the following
idiomatic Rust code:

```rust
fn f(a: A) -> (X, W) { ... }
fn g(input: (W, B)) -> Y { ... }

|(a, b): (A, B)| -> (X, Y) {
    let (x, w) = f(a);
    (x, g((w, b)))
}
```
:::

### Symmetric monoidal categories

By now should there should be no surprises about how symmetric monoidal
categories (SMCs) arise in this framework: take the modal double theory of
[generalized monoidal categories](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-0005.xml),
now with the symmetric variant $T = \List_{\bij}$ of the list double monad.

Besides the associators and unitors, SMCs have a new kind of structure
isomorphisms, the symmetries. Let's see how these appear in the internal
language. Taking $\Gamma \coloneqq [X: \Ob_{\cal{X}},\ Y: \Ob_{\cal{X}}]$ to
have two objects, we can form the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [x,y]: [X,Y] \vdash_{\List_{\bij} \Hom_{\cal{X}}} [y,x]: [Y,X]
$$

using the swap permutation $\sigma: [2] \xto{\cong} [2]$, just as we did for
symmetric multicategories. But now we can apply the cell $\Hom_{\otimes}$
induced by the tensor $\otimes: \List_{\bij} \cal{X} \to \cal{X}$ to construct a
new term

$$
\Gamma \mid (x,y): X \otimes Y \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} (y,x): Y \otimes X.
$$

This term denotes the symmetry isomorphism $\sigma_{X,Y}: X \otimes Y \to Y
\otimes X$.

### Cartesian categories

Cartesian categories, by which we mean cartesian monoidal categories, arise from
the modal double theory of generalized monoidal categories, for the cartesian
variant $T = \List_{\fun}$ of the list double monad.

Diagonals and projections are constructed in the same manner as symmetries: one
forms the appropriate lists and then applies the cell $\Hom_{\cal{X}}$ induced
by the product operation $\otimes: \List_{\fun} \cal{X} \to \cal{X}$,
conventionally written $\times$. For example, to construct the diagonal in the
context $\Gamma \coloneqq [X: \Ob_{\cal{X}}]$, first form the list

$$
\Gamma \mid [x]: [X] \vdash_{\List_{\fun} \Hom_{\cal{X}}} [x,x]: [X,X]
$$

using the function $\sigma: [2] \xto{!} [1]$, then apply the cell
$\Hom_{\cal{X}}$, and finally pre-compose with the unitor to derive

$$
\Gamma \mid x: X \vdash_{\Hom_{\cal{X}}} (x,x): X \times X.
$$

::: {.callout-tip}
#### Remark: Comparison with standard algebraic type theory

The internal language for cartesian categories here differs from the standard
presentation of product types [e.g., @shulman-2016, Figure 2.4] in that, while
it has the standard introduction rule for product types (pairing), it does not
have the standard elimination rules (projections). That is, given a term $t: X
\times Y$, there are no terms $\pi_1(t): X$ or $\pi_2(t): Y$ constructed by
post-composing $t$ with projection operations. Instead, projecting out a
component of an arbitrary term $t$ is a special case of destructuring, so that,
say, the first component of $t$ is given by $\letin{(x, y) = t} x: X$ or,
permitting the use of anonymous variable names, $\letin{(x, \_) = t} x: X$.

On the other hand, the latter term is a notation supported by many programming
languages. For example, the Rust syntax is:

```rust
let (x, _) = t;
```
:::

### Markov categories

\newcommand{\Determ}{\mathsf{Determ}}
\newcommand{\Stoch}{\mathsf{Stoch}}

\newcommand{\Predictors}{\mathrm{Predictors}}
\newcommand{\Coefficients}{\mathrm{Coefficients}}
\newcommand{\Dispersion}{\mathrm{Dispersion}}
\newcommand{\Response}{\mathrm{Response}}

Our final example, the internal language for a version of a [Markov
category](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Markov+category), is the most complex
logic treated here. The modal double theory for [Markov
categories](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000I.xml), requiring a mode
theory more elaborate than that of a single monad, axiomatizes a Markov
category[^markov-category-definition] effectively as

- a cartesian category (of **deterministic** maps), which maps into
- a [semicartesian
  category](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/semicartesian%20monoidal%20category)
  (of **stochastic** maps), via
- a [monoidal promonad](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000G.xml).

The double theory therefore combines several features used previously in
isolation.

[^markov-category-definition]:
  Be warned that this definition is not equivalent to, but is slightly more than
  general than, the standard definition of a Markov category [@fritz-2020,
  Definition 2.1]. It makes the deterministic maps be *structure* rather than
  *property*.

Complexity of the double theory aside, the internal language itself is no more
difficult to use than the preceding ones. To illustrate, we write down a simple
term denoting the sampling distribution of an abstract "surface plus noise"
regression model [@efron-2020]. Such a model has a deterministic component, the
*regression function*, and a stochastic component, the *noise distribution*.
Introducing the suggestive notation $\Determ \coloneqq \Hom_{\cal{X}}$ and
$\Stoch \coloneqq P$, this setup is captured by the context

$$
\begin{aligned}
\Gamma \coloneqq [\
    & \Predictors: \Ob_{\cal{X}}, \\
    & \Response: \Ob_{\cal{X}}, \\
    & \Coefficients: \Ob_{\cal{X}}, \\
    & \Dispersion: \Ob_{\cal{X}}, \\
    & f: \Determ(\Predictors \times \Coefficients,\, \Response) \\
    & \mathrm{noise}: \Stoch(\Response \otimes \Dispersion, \Response)\
].
\end{aligned}
$$

The sampling distribution, as a function of both the predicators and the
parameters, is then:

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\Gamma \mid (x, \beta, \phi):
    \Predictors \otimes \Coefficients \otimes \Dispersion 
  \vdash_{\Stoch} \\
  & \qquad \text{noise}(f(x, \beta), \phi): \Response.
\end{aligned}
$$

Deriving this term is left as an exercise for the reader.

## Rationale and alternatives

### Bespoke internal languages

An obvious alternative to this RFC is to apply the standard methodology: for
each categorical structure of interest, find its internal language and then
implement that specific type theory. In this approach, every logic in CatColab
requiring an internal language would have its own custom type-theoretic
frontend.

From the "semantics first" perspective of CatColab, this approach is not
unreasonable. By carefully separating the textual syntax, the data structures
for models and morphisms to which the syntax compiles, and the analyses that can
be run on those data structures, we could hope to retain many of the benefits of
a uniform meta-logic, at least outside of the frontend. Indeed, this has been
our intended approach to *graphical* editors for graphs, Petri nets, and so
forth, whose variety seems to defy systematization. Yet I would still rather see
the ad hoc approach to internal languages as a fallback option---at best a
pragmatic compromise to the vision of CatColab as an interoperable family of
programming languages.

### String diagrams

Type theory is one methodology to find canonical forms for morphisms, but it's
not the only one. Among applied category theorists, the usual recipe to find
canonical forms for morphisms in monoidal categories is to use *string diagrams*
[@selinger-2010] or their combinatorial counterparts, *wiring diagrams*
[@patterson-et-al-2020]. Incidentally, string diagrams are a point-free syntax,
demonstrating that pointfulness is not a necessary property of normalizing
syntax.

String diagrams are not so much an alternative to type-theoretic textual
notation as a complement to it. Graphical and textual syntaxes each have their
pros and cons, and both should be available in CatColab. Making multiple kinds
of syntax work together seamlessly poses engineering challenges, if not also
mathematical ones. This document,however, is solely about textual syntax.

## Prior art

### Frameworks for substructural types theories

To my knowledge, the most relevant prior art is Licata-Shulman-Riley's
"fibrational framework for substructural and modal logics" [@licata-2017]. Not
only do both frameworks aim to unify a range of cartesian and substructural type
theories, they share high-level features in their technical approaches. The
details diverge significantly, though.

Both frameworks are parameterized by two-dimensional categorical structures that
determine the rules of a sequent calculus. For LSR, a *cartesian
2-multicategory* (i.e., a category-enriched cartesian multicategory) plays the
role that a *modal double theory* does here. Moreover, a *locally discrete
fibration* over a cartesian 2-multicategory plays the role that a *model* of a
modal double theory does here. The latter analogy can be made tighter by
recalling that a $\SSet$-valued lax double functor is equivalent to a *discrete
double fibration* [@lambert-2021], and presumably a similar correspondence holds
for $\SSet$-valued functors of VDCs.

A difference in philosophy between the two accounts is that LSR start from the
standard context structure of cartesian logic (i.e., the internal language of a
cartesian multicategory) and then pass to substructural logics by tracking the
use of variables through annotations on the turnstile. In contrast, we start
from the trivial context structure of unary type theory and move up the
hierarchy of substructural logics using different versions of the list double
monad on $\SSet$. The only annotation on the turnstile is the morphism type. An
advantage of LSR is that it hews much closer to how contexts are typically
treated in type theory. An advantage of this account is that the bookkeeping for
variable use shows up only in the *derivations* of terms, rather the terms
themselves. It also avoids privileging cartesian multicategories over other
categorical structures, at least not more than pointful notation does
intrinsically.

### Mode theories

The concept of a *mode theory* has also appeared in work by Licata and Shulman
[-@licata-2015; @licata-2017]. Moreover, we use essentially the same definition
of a mode theory as in the first reference (a 2-category). Yet the high-level
comparison is easily confused as there is a level shift in how mode theories are
invoked here and in LSR. What LSR call the mode theory (a cartesian
2-multicategory) corresponds to a double theory, as just explained. We use a
mode theory to organize the various modalities available in modal double
theories and their models, principally the list double monads but possibly also
others not discussed here, such as the codiscrete modality. To see the
difference, in our framework the mode theory and its intended semantics in
$\SSet$ could be fixed for all logics, and that's exactly what we intend to do
in implementation. In contrast, for LSR, one chooses a different mode theory for
each logic of interest, like we choose a double theory.

### Split contexts and two-level type theories

Our contexts $\Gamma \mid u: X$ are a kind of [split
context](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/split+context) $\Gamma \mid \Delta$,
where the judgments in $\Delta$ can depend on those in $\Gamma$ but not the
other way around. In a similar spirit, our type theory can be seen as a
[two-level type theory](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/two-level+type+theory)
(2LTT), and we have borrowed the terms "outer type theory" and "inner type
theory" from this area. With that said, the specific work on split contexts or
2LTT that we know of has very different goals, leading to very different
mathematics. Work on 2LTT, for instance, has aimed to embed homotopy type theory
in Martin-Löf type theory. We will not attempt to survey this literature here,
but see the linked nLab pages and references therein.

## Future possibilities

### Meta-theoretic results

We have a presented a type theory and demonstrated by example that it can
reconstruct the internal languages of a range of categorical structures.
However, we have proved almost nothing about it.

First, the type theory assumes that the parameterizing double theory is flat.
For the simpler double theories, like those of database schemas or promonads,
flatness is often obvious, but it's generally nontrivial to see that a double
theory given by finite presentation is flat. For example, flatness of the theory
of generalized monoidal categories amounts to a coherence theorem about the
associator and unitor cells. These and other flatness results should be proved.

As for the type theory itself, at minimum, it should be proved that the type
theory is **sound** for models of any fixed double theory. That is, every
context $\Gamma \mid u: X$ should denote a well-defined object in the model
generated by $\Gamma$, and every term $\Gamma \mid u: X \vdash_P t: Y$ should
denote a well-defined morphism in that model. The type should also be
**complete** in the sense that every morphism in the model generated by $\Gamma$
is denoted by some term. Beyond this, it should be possible to establish the
expected meta-theoretic properties of particular internal languages. For
example, the internal languages of planar, symmetric, and cartesian
multicategories (omitting the let binding rule) should make the cut rule
admissible.

### Validation against more theories

We are far from exhausting the categorical structures within reach of this
formalism. Here a few examples going beyond those presented here but still
fitting neatly in the framework.

**Representable multicategories**. Arguably the categorical structure most
faithful to programming syntax is neither a multicategory nor a monoidal
category but a *representable* multicategory.[^representable-multicategories] In
most programming languages, functions have multiple inputs and a single output,
*and* there are product types. That's exactly what you get in a representable
multicategory. It is straightforward to axiomatize representable (generalized)
multicategories as a modal double theory extending that of generalized
multicategories; see the [math
docs](https://next.catcolab.org/math/dct-000O.xml) and references therein.

[^representable-multicategories]:
  That representable multicategories are equivalent to monoidal categories makes
  them indistinguishable to the category theorist, but such a semantic
  equivalence does not imply that their internal languages are equally
  ergonomic.

**Adjoint logics**. All of the double theories considered here have a single
generating object, $\cal{X}$. This restriction is by no means fundamental. We
can just as well consider categorical structures involving multiple categories
related by functors or adjunctions. Indeed, monads and adjunctions are both
axiomatized as 2-theories, hence also as simple double theories
[@lambert-patterson-2024, Section 3]. As a specific example, the categorical
semantics of mixed [linear/non-linear logic
](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/linear-non-linear+logic) (LNL) is a cartesian
closed category and a symmetric monoidal closed category, connected by a
symmetric monoidal adjunction [@benton-1994]. Apart from the monoidal
closedness, this structure would be straightfoward to axiomatize as a modal
double theory. It would then be interesting to unwind the type theory for LNL
furnished by this double theory.
