---
title: |
  `0005` Separating models and instances of double theories
author: tslil clingman
date: 2026-04-14
bibliography: _references.bib

tikz-preamble: |
  \DeclareMathOperator{\Mnd}{\textsf{Mnd}}
  \DeclareMathOperator{\Cat}{\textsf{Cat}}
  \DeclareMathOperator{\Set}{\textsf{Set}}
  \DeclareMathOperator{\Maybe}{Maybe}

  \newlength{\ProArLineHeight}\setlength{\ProArLineHeight}{1.25ex}

  \usetikzlibrary{arrows.meta,shapes,arrows,calc,
    decorations.markings,decorations.pathreplacing,
    positioning}

  \tikzset{node distance=1.5cm, auto, minimum size=0.7cm,
    baseline=(current bounding box.center),
    shrink/.style={outer sep=0,inner sep=0, minimum size=0},
    squeeze/.style={auto=false,outer sep=3pt,inner sep=0, minimum size=0},
    la/.style={scale=0.8},
    a/.style={->},
    u/.style={dashed,->},
    d/.style={double, double equal sign distance,-},
    cover/.style={preaction={draw=white, -,line width=6pt}},
    over/.style={auto=false,fill=white,inner sep=3pt},
    pro/.style={decoration={markings,
        mark=at position 1/2 with {
          \draw[-,line width=\pgflinewidth]
          (0,{-\ProArLineHeight/2}) -- (0,{\ProArLineHeight/2});
        }},
      inner sep=\ProArLineHeight,
      postaction=decorate,
    },
    proarrow/.style={->,pro},
    prodotted/.style={->,dotted,pro},
    proequal/.style={double distance=1.5pt,pro}}

  \newdimen{\pullbackmarkerlength}
  \pullbackmarkerlength=1ex
  \def\pullbackangle{30}

  \pgfmathsetlengthmacro{\pullbackradius}{\pullbackmarkerlength*sin(45)/sin(45-\pullbackangle)}
  \newcommand{\pullback}[1]{
    \draw ({#1}.center) ++(360-\pullbackangle:\pullbackradius) -- +(0,-\pullbackmarkerlength);
    \draw ({#1}.center) ++(270+\pullbackangle:\pullbackradius) -- +(\pullbackmarkerlength,0);
  }

---

{{< include _macros.qmd >}}

\DeclareMathOperator{\Mnd}{\textsf{Mnd}}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Cat}{\textsf{Cat}}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Set}{\textsf{Set}}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Maybe}{Maybe}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Psh}{Psh}

### RFC status

under construction!

## Summary
We demonstrate an obstruction between the equivalence of co-presheaves and discrete op-fibrations in the presence of pseudo-type monad morphisms (a doctrine or modality). This obstruction is used to motivate altering the definition of model from "functor from theory into Set" to "category fibred over theory", and consequently we differentiate between the previously coinciding notions of modelling a theory and instantiating a theory. This is a strict generalisation in the presence of modalities but otherwise coincides precisely, and there is room to study and embed the theory of the former gadgets in this new setting. We conclude by utilising this language to describe the theory for "schemas with nullable relations and attributes" and elaborating the notion of model and instance in this setting.

::: {#obstruction}
## The Obstruction

Recall that there is a classical equivalence between the categories of co-presheaves and discrete op-fibrations in the purely 1-categorical setting, and that this equivalence is implemented in one direction by "taking sets of fibres over objects".

The goal of this section is to establish that this correspondence is no longer true in the face of "modalities": a system of compatible monads with a particular choice of semantics on one or more categories. In particular, we'll focus on working with the $\Maybe$ modality familiar to Haskell programmers, which we take concretely on set to be the "free pointed set" monad.

To ease notation let us write $\Mnd$ for the category whose objects are monads on categories and whose morphisms are pseudo-type monad morphisms.

With this notation, consider the following two 1-categories at issue:

* $\textsf{MDOpFib}$, the category described by the below pullback where the comma categories are the usual one-categorical sort
```tikz
\begin{tikzpicture}
\node(a)[]{$\textsf{MDOpFib}$};
\node(b)[right=2cm of a]{$(\Mnd\downarrow\Mnd)$};
\node(c)[below of=a]{$\textsf{DOpFib}$};
\node(d)[below of=b]{$(\Cat\downarrow \Cat)$};
\draw[a](a) to (b);
\draw[a](a) to (c);
\draw[a](b) to node[la]{\text{forget}} (d);
\draw[a](c) to node[la,swap]{\text{forget}}(d);
\pullback{a};
\end{tikzpicture}
```
* $\textsf{MCPsh}$, defined to be the slice category $\Mnd/(\Set,\Maybe)$

Note: readers may wish to take the lax slice $\Mnd/_{\ell}(\Set,\Maybe)$ instead, or work with 2-categories instead of 1-categories of op-fibrations and monads, but we're going to exhibit an obstruction on the level of objects so the precise nature of the morphisms not at issue.

Finally with the pieces in play we may turn our attention to the game. We will pick out a particularly boring object of $\textsf{MDOpFib}$ and show that it is not in the image of the category of elements of any object of $\textsf{MCPsh}$.

Consider then the "free category with the action of a monad on a point" $\Delta_+$, alternatively known as the augmented simplicial category. More elaborately, we think of $\Delta_+$ as on object of $\Mnd$ given by the data of $[0]\in\ob\Delta_+$ and the action of a "generic" monad $M\colon\Delta_+\to\Delta_+$ defined by $M[n]=[n+1]$, with the unit and multiplication being given by the appropriate morphisms $[0]\to [1]\leftarrow [2]$. Our particularly boring object of $\textsf{MDOpFib}$ is then the identity $\Delta_+=\Delta_+$.

To see the obstruction, suppose a generic object $$\left((\cat C, M')\in\Ob\Mnd, F\colon(\cat C,M')\to (\Set,\Maybe)\right)\in\textsf{MCPsh}\quad .$$ If this object is intended to correspond to $\Delta_+=\Delta_+$ through the category of elements construction, then we must have $|F\bullet|=1$ for the object $\bullet\in\Ob\cat C$ which encodes the fibre over $[0]$. It therefore follows that $|FM'\bullet|=|\Maybe F\bullet|=2$ for the object $M'\bullet\in\Ob\cat C$ which encodes the fibre over $[1]$. However, the cardinality of the fibre over $[1]\in\Ob\Delta_+$ in $\Delta_+=\Delta_+$ is 1, so that no possible $\cat C,M',F$ can give rise to the modal discrete op-fibration $\Delta_+=\Delta_+$.

Remark: there appears to be something far more general at play here about cardinalites and classifying objects, but as presented the obstruction is sufficient for our purposes and we will not pursue a more general account.

To conclude this section, we suggest without proof that this example will embed as an obstruction in any more sophisticated "category-like" objects which in particular admit appropriate forgetful functors back to $\Cat$ and $\Mnd$, including in particular flavours of double categories and virtual double categories.

:::

## Proposal

### Background

Let us recall a few fundamental definitions and results from [@hohc] concerning virtual double categories.

Recall the elementary definitions of virtual double categories, monads on virtual double categories, and horizontal Kleisli virtual double categories [@hohc], [@cruttwell-shulman-2010]. We take the perhaps confusing, almost circular definition that **the category of virtual double categories** "is" $\mathbb{H}\textsf{Kl}(\Psh\mathbb G_2, T)$, where $\mathbb G_2$ is the 1-globe category, $\Psh\mathbb G_2$ is the category of graphs, and $T$ is the free category monad on graphs.

In particular this means that a virtual double category $\dbl C$ is equivalently a span of graphs $$C^0\xleftarrow{C^\ell} C^1\xrightarrow{C^r} TC^0$$ where $C^0$ is the "object graph" and $C^1$ is the arrow graph. That is,

* the elements of $C^0_0$ are the objects of the virtual double category,
* the elements of $C^0_1$ are the pro-arrows of the virtual double category,
* the elements of $C^1_0$ are the vertical morphisms of the virtual double category, and
* the elements of $C^1_1$ are the cells of the virtual double category.

The reason for this machinery is that we can therefore follow [@hohc] and determine abstractly the following definition.

#### Definition: discrete op-fibration of virtual double categories
Given the data of pair of virtual double categories $\dbl C, \dbl D$, and a virtual double functor $F\colon\dbl D\to\dbl C$ as arranged below, we say that $F$ has the structure of a **discrete op-fibration** when the square marked $(1)$ is a pullback.
```tikz
\begin{tikzpicture}
\node(1)[]{$D^0$};
\node(2)[right of= 1]{$D^1$};
\node(3)[right of= 2]{$TD^0$};
\node(4)[below of=1]{$C^0$};
\node(5)[below of=2]{$C^1$};
\node(6)[below of=3]{$TC^0$};
\draw[a](2) to node[la, swap]{$D^\ell$}(1);
\draw[a](2) to node[la]{$D^r$}(3);
\draw[a](1) to node[la,swap]{$F^0$} (4);
\draw[a](2) to node[la,swap]{$F^1$} (5);
\draw[a](3) to node[la]{$TF^0$}(6);
\draw[a](5) to node[la]{$C^\ell$}(4);
\draw[a](5) to node[la,swap]{$C^r$}(6);
\path(2) to node[over]{$(1)$} (6);
\end{tikzpicture}
```

In elementary terms this means that a functor $F\colon\dbl D\to\dbl C$ has the structure of a discrete op-fibration when:

* given an object $d\in\Ob\dbl D$ and a vertical morphism $f\colon Fd\to c$ there exists a unique vertical morphism $\langle f,d\rangle$ of $\dbl D$ with domain $d$ such that $F\langle f,d\rangle=f$, and

* for all $n\in\mathbb N$, given pro-arrows of $\dbl D$ arranged as below left and a cell of $\dbl C$ as below right, there exists a unique cell $\langle\rho,(q_i)\rangle$ of $\dbl D$ with top boundary the $q_i$ such that $F\langle\rho,(q_i)\rangle=\rho$.
```tikz
\begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=1.2cm]
\node(d1)[]{$d_0$};
\node(dd)[right of=d1]{$\ldots$};
\node(dn)[right of=dd]{$d_n$};
\draw[proarrow](d1) to node[la]{$q_1$} (dd);
\draw[proarrow](dd) to node[la]{$q_n$} (dn);

\node(c1)[right=1.5cm of dn]{$Fd_0$};
\node(cd)[right of=c1]{$\ldots$};
\node(cn)[right of=cd]{$Fd_n$};
\draw[proarrow](c1) to node[la]{$Fq_1$} (cd);
\draw[proarrow](cd) to node[la]{$Fq_n$} (cn);
\node(x)[below of=c1]{$x$};
\node(y)[below of=cn]{$y$};
\draw[a](c1) to node[la,swap]{$f$} (x);
\draw[a](cn) to node[la]{$g$} (y);
\draw[proarrow](x) to node[la,swap]{$r$} (y);
\path(c1) to node[auto=false]{$\rho$} (y);
\end{tikzpicture}
```

We leave it to the reader to observe that under the embedding of categories into virtual double categories $\mathbb H\textsf{Kl}(\Psh\mathbb G_1,\id)\rightarrowtail \mathbb H\textsf{Kl}(\Psh\mathbb G_2,T)$ adjunct to the restriction $(-)_0\colon\Psh\mathbb G_2\to\Psh\mathbb G_1=\Set$, this definition correctly specialises to the usual notion of discrete op-fibration.

#### Discrete op-fibrations correspond to co-preseheaves, even though we haven't proven it

Let us recall the combination of Theorems 6.3.1 and Theorems 6.4.3 of [@hohc], here specialised to virtual double categories: there is an equivalence of categories $\textsf{DOpFib}(\dbl C)\simeq\textsf{VDblCat}(\dbl C,\SSet)$ for each virtual double category $\dbl C$, where $\textsf{DOpFib}(\dbl C)$ is the category of discrete op-fibrations of virtual double categories over $\dbl C$.

Note that this result, as literally stated, isn't quite of the shape that we were talking about in the section about the [obstruction](#obstruction). Unfortunately we were not able to find a reference which goes through the very painful computation of showing that this point-wise equivalence is the on-objects component of a 2-equivalence between the 2-categories $\textsf{DOpFib}$ and $\textsf{VDblCat}/\SSet$.

#### Definition: split contractions of virtual double categories

Let us begin by recalling the notion of a split contraction due to [@hohc], here specialised to graphs, using the language and framework of [@clingman-2022].

Given two graphs $G,H\in\Ob\Psh\mathbb G_2$, we say that a graph morphism $F\colon G\to H$ has the **structure of a split contraction** when:

* there is a chosen section $s\colon H_0\to G_0$ of $F_0$
* given $x,x'\in H_0$, $v\colon x\to x'$ in $H^1$, and $y\in F_0^\leftharpoonup\{x\}, y'\in F_0^\leftharpoonup\{x'\}$, there is a unique $w\colon y\to y'$ such that $Fw=v$.

The notion of split contraction may be applied to the formalism of $T$-Categories in a _relative_ sense, and we recall the specialisation of relative contractions for functors of virtual double categories in [@clingman-2022] there called "proof-relevant algebras".

Given the data of pair of virtual double categories $\dbl C, \dbl D$, and a virtual double functor $F\colon\dbl D\to\dbl C$ as arranged below left, we say that **$F$ has the structure of a split contraction** when the morphism $PF$ indicated below right has the structure of a split contraction.
```tikz
\begin{tikzpicture}
\node(1)[]{$D^0$};
\node(2)[right of= 1]{$D^1$};
\node(3)[right of= 2]{$TD^0$};
\node(4)[below of=1]{$C^0$};
\node(5)[below of=2]{$C^1$};
\node(6)[below of=3]{$TC^0$};
\draw[a](2) to node[la, swap]{$D^\ell$}(1);
\draw[a](2) to node[la]{$D^r$}(3);
\draw[a](1) to node[la,swap]{$F^0$} (4);
\draw[a](2) to node[la,swap]{$F^1$} (5);
\draw[a](3) to node[la]{$TF^0$}(6);
\draw[a](5) to node[la]{$C^\ell$}(4);
\draw[a](5) to node[la,swap]{$C^r$}(6);

\node(7)[right=2cm of 3]{$D^1$};
\node(8)[below right of=7]{$\bullet$};
\node(9)[below of=8]{$C^1$};
\node(10)[right of=8]{$TD^0$};
\node(11)[below of=10]{$TC^0$};
\draw[a](8) to (9);
\draw[a](8) to (10);
\draw[a](9) to node[la,swap]{$C^r$} (11);
\draw[a](10) to node[la]{$TF^0$} (11);
\draw[a,bend left](7) to node[la]{$D^r$} (10);
\draw[a,bend right](7) to node[la,swap]{$F^1$} (9);
\draw[u,shorten >=-2ex](7) to node[la]{$PF$} (8);
\end{tikzpicture}
```

In elementary terms this means that a functor $F\colon\dbl D\to\dbl C$ has the structure of a split contraction when:

* given an object $d\in\Ob\dbl D$ and a vertical morphism $f\colon Fd\to c$ there is a chosen vertical morphism $\langle f,d\rangle$ of $\dbl D$ with domain $d$ such that $F\langle f,d\rangle=f$, and

* for all $n\in\mathbb N$, given pro-arrows of $\dbl D$ arranged as below left and a cell of $\dbl C$ as below right, there exists a unique cell $\langle\rho,(q_i)\rangle$ of $\dbl D$ with top boundary the $q_i$ such that $F\langle\rho,(q_i)\rangle=\rho$.
```tikz
\begin{tikzpicture}[node distance=1.2cm]
\node(d1)[]{$d_0$};
\node(dd)[right of=d1]{$\ldots$};
\node(dn)[right of=dd]{$d_n$};
\draw[proarrow](d1) to node[la]{$q_1$} (dd);
\draw[proarrow](dd) to node[la]{$q_n$} (dn);

\node(c1)[right=1.5cm of dn]{$Fd_0$};
\node(cd)[right of=c1]{$\ldots$};
\node(cn)[right of=cd]{$Fd_n$};
\draw[proarrow](c1) to node[la]{$Fq_1$} (cd);
\draw[proarrow](cd) to node[la]{$Fq_n$} (cn);
\node(x)[below of=c1]{$x$};
\node(y)[below of=cn]{$y$};
\draw[a](c1) to node[la,swap]{$f$} (x);
\draw[a](cn) to node[la]{$g$} (y);
\draw[proarrow](x) to node[la,swap]{$r$} (y);
\path(c1) to node[auto=false]{$\rho$} (y);
\end{tikzpicture}
```

#### TODO: to what do split contractions correspond?

TODO

### The fibrational perspective

The primary impetus behind this RFC is to allow us to model database schemas in a way that is compatible with the existing formalisms of C-sets and theories (in the sense of CatColab) simultaneously. On the former account, a schema is a category $\cat C$ and an instance of that schema is a functor $I\colon\cat C\to\mathsf{Set}$. On the latter account, however, a theory is a (kind of) virtual double category $\dbl T$ and a model is a (kind of) virtual double functor $M\colon\dbl T\to\SSet$.

From this perspective it is hoped that a mismatch is evident: we are lacking the ability to proscribe a theory for a "kind of schemas" whose models are schemas of that kind in the C-set perspective, and whose instances are instances from the C-set perspective. Instead, if we constrain ourselves to these devices we are forced to use schemas as theories, which is at odds with the definition-with-attitude perspective that a theory specify only the "generators and relations" at the typing judgement level, and models give rise to particular systems obeying these typing judgements. That is to say, every particular case of a certain "type of schema" would be its own individual theory and we would have to construct by hand migrations for each concrete case, among other shortcomings.

#### Definitions: Theory, Model, Instance

Given a theory $\dbl T$, a **model $(M,\dbl M)$ of the theory $\dbl T$** is a double functor $M\colon \dbl M\to \dbl T$ with the structure of a split contraction.

Given a theory $\dbl T$ and a model $M\colon \dbl M\to \dbl T$, an **instance $I$ of the model $(M,\dbl M)$ of the theory $\dbl T$** is a virtual double functor $I\colon\dbl M\to\SSet$.

#### Modal versions

#### Unital versions

#### Tabulator versions

#### Relation to previous definition

Given that we have passed from functors to spans, there are several suggestive connections that may be worth pursuing. In particular there ought to be two antipodal embeddings of functors $\dbl T\to\SSet$ in spans $\dbl T\leftarrow\cdot \to \SSet$ given by taking as left leg the identity and as the "virtual double category of elements". Going backwards we expect to be able to mirror the classical theory of left extensions.

There appears to be a lot of prior literature on studying certain kinds of fibrations in the double, lax/pseudo double, and multicategorical settings. In fact it would appear that Topos itself has domain experts on the matter. It seems hopeful then that working out the particulars of this viewpoint would be well within our capabilities.

## Case study: nullable attributes

Finally, to come full circle: this "wider" perspective on models and instances affords us a luxurious encoding of the theory of "schemas with nullable attributes", as well as a separation of concerns between models of that theory and instances of those models.

The theory of "schemas with nullable attributes" is the (plain) virtual double category given by:

- two objects $E$, $A$
- two pro-arrows $E\nrightarrow E$, $E\nrightarrow A$
- two more pro-arrows $E\nrightarrow M(E)$, $E\nrightarrow M(A)$ where $M$ is the Maybe modality/doctrine
- no further data

Thus an (inhabited) model for this theory is a bunch of "types" which we judge to be entities and attributes, and some particular pro-arrows between these types which we understand to be relations and attribute typing information, where the codomains of these pro-arrows are allowed to be of the form "Maybe(...)" where that typing information is correct. This is our "C" in the C-set picture.

Finally an instance of a particular model would be a gadget providing terms to all of these types, which completes the algebraic database perspective.

## Todo:

1. Note that in the old setting we would often choose pro-arrows because a functor takes a pro-arrow to a span, that is, the intuition was that pro-arrows determine the signature of "binary morphisms"" in the theory. In the fibred perspective this is different, because there are two places we can look for things indexed by pairs of objects: vertical morphisms, pro-arrows. But these have very different semantics! Now an individual TYPE which has a pro-arrow signature is sent to a matrix of TERMS. So if we want to think about "binary morphisms" the place to look for these is in the vertical aspect, because their terms are functions.

2. Note that this perspective is somewhat subtle in the face of the discrete op-fibration structure. Given a pair of objects $c,c'\in\Ob\dbl C$ there is in general no restriction on the cardinality of the set $\sum_{d,d'\in\Ob\dbl D}\dbl D(d,d')\times(Fd=c\wedge Fd'=c')$. On the other hand, once we fix a vertical morphism in the base $f\colon c\to c'$ we see $$\left[\sum_{d,d'\in\Ob\dbl D}\sum_{g\in\dbl D(d,d')}(Fd=c\wedge Fd'=c'\wedge Fg=f)\right]\cong\sum_{d\in\Ob\dbl D}Fd=c\quad .$$ This is problematic! It says that we cannot have multiple vertical morphisms of this particular type signature.

3. This means that we should _not_ consider discrete op-fibrations but instead contractions. In this picture, even if we fix a vertical morphism in the base $f\colon c\to c'$ the only restriction on the cardinality is $$\left|\sum_{d,d'\in\Ob\dbl D}\sum_{g\in\dbl D(d,d')}(Fd=c\wedge Fd'=c'\wedge Fg=f)\right|\ge 1$$
