---
title: |
    `0006` Notebook Typescript API
author: Kaspar Bumke
date: 2026-06-19
---

{{< include _macros.qmd >}}

::: {.callout-note}

### RFC status

This RFC is tracked in
[#](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/issues/).
:::

## Summary & Motivation

Catlog and its WASM interface expose a rich and flexible API surface for formal
modeling. The full flexibility of this is available to our frontend via
Typescript, with types largely generated from Rust, but the ergonomics and
type-safety of this API are sub-par. We want to improve this API surface with
the aim of helping three main use-cases:

1. Our use in the CatColab frontend
2. Other programmatic use from Javascript and Typescript
3. Users instructing LLMs

We will focus on notebook documents, since that is the only document currently
in use, but this API should be expandable to other types of documents in the
future.

## Technical approach

We will replace our current `catcolab-document-methods` package with a package
called `catcolab-documents` that makes use of `catcolab-document-types` and
wraps notebook creation and editing in a more ergonomic interface.

We will also add a package called `catcolab-logics` that defines the logics we
currently make available to users on the frontend.

In the future we may publish these packages on public registries such as NPM
and JSR.

`catcolab-documents` provides a default `binder` API instance and defines the
`RichText` cells.

```ts
import { binder, RichText } from "catcolab-documents";
import { Aspect, SimpleOlog, Type } from "catcolab-logics/simple-olog";
```

All documents are created through a binder instance. The default binder uses a
plain in-memory store for documents and provides no reactivity on its values.
Creating more complex binder instances is covered in [Use with SolidJS and
Automerge](#use-with-solidjs-and-automerge).

```ts
const notebook = binder.createNotebook(SimpleOlog, { name: "An Olog" });
```

`catcolab-documents` not only defines the document interface it also provides
conveniences for users to define their own logics or sub-logic "shapes".
