---
title: |
  `0009` Instances in tt
author: Kevin Carlson
date: 2026-05-08
bibliography: _references.bib
---

{{< include _macros.qmd >}}

::: {.callout-note}
### RFC status

This RFC is essentially about
[#1246](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/pull/1246).
:::

## Summary

The vision for CatColab is to integrate theories, their
models, and their instances into one general system; the purpose of this 
RFC is to open a plan on extending DoubleTT to include instances,
especially to allow for gluing of instances via instantiation, 
as we already support for models of discrete double theories. 

## The intended semantics

Fixing a (perhaps modal) double theory $\mathbb{D},$ the category $\mathbb{D}-\mathrm{Mod}$ 
of $\mathbb{S}\mathsf{pan}$-valued models of $\mathbb{D}$ is the base of a fibration 
$\mathrm{Inst}\to \mathbb{D}-\mathrm{Mod}$ whose fiber over a $\mathbb{D}$-model $X$ is the category
$\mathrm{Inst}_X$ of instances of $X.$ The discrete case of this fibration
(actually a trifibration) is studied in [@carlson-patterson-2026, Corollary 4.8], while the 
modal case is not yet mathematically established. 

Now the fibration $\mathrm{Inst} \to \mathbb{D}-\mathrm{Mod}$ 
admits a morphism to the codomain fibration of $\mathbb{D}-\mathrm{Mod}$, given by sending 
an $X$-instance $H$ to its model of elements or Grothendieck construction $\int H\to X.$^[Though we don't do it explicitly in the paper, it's easy to check that $\int$ sends cartesian instance
morphisms to pullback squares of model: in fact the whole fibration of instances is a subfibration 
of the codomain fibration of categories via the collage category affiliated to a model.]
This is handled in 5.1 of [@carlson-patterson-2026]. 

A morphism of fibrations into a codomain fibration is precisely a *comprehension category*, 
see [nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/categorical+semantics+of+dependent+type+theory#comprehension_categories), one of the standard semantics of dependent type 
theory. In a comprehension category the base of the fibration is the category of *contexts*, 
while the fibers are the categories of *types* in a given context, and the 
morphism into the codomain fibration gives the context extension operation 

$$\dfrac{\Gamma \vdash A\texttt{ type}}{\Gamma, x : A\texttt{ ctx}}$$

The vertical morphisms $f:A\to B$ between types in context $\Gamma$ are (for us, at least)
terms of $B$ with context extended by $A$; in particular the closed terms of $B$ 
are just the morphisms $1\to B.$ For instance if $X$ is the schema for graphs, a closed
term of an instance is a vertex equipped with a self-loop; we see that non-closed terms 
are important, since we're working in something at least as general as a presheaf category. 

## Instances are not diagrams

While the comprehension category interprets an instance as a diagram, it will always 
interpret it as a discrete opfibration, whereas in `catlog::dbl` until now a diagram
has been, at least in the mind of the developer, a *presentation* of an instance.
In fact a diagram $f:E\to B$ of models 
is not that great of a data structure for presenting an instance, 
because in a discrete opfibration the morphisms in $E$ are entirely determined by those in 
$B$ and the objects of $E,$ so that morphism data in $E$ is at best redundant.
Instead, an instance $H$ of the model $X$ is most efficiently presented by giving 
the fibers $H_x$ over objects of $X$ together with, as necessary, relations between 
the actions of morphisms of $X$ on these fibers. For instance, one might generate the
path graph of length $2$ as something like $\langle e_1,e_2\mid e_1\cdot t = e_2\cdot s\rangle.$
I've been working on augmenting the type theory to allow for precisely such specifications.

## An example 
Here's an example of the current implementation in the text elaborator
```
set_theory ThSchema
model Graph := [...]
instance PP : Graph := [
    E := [e1,e2]
    src(e1) := src(e2)
    tgt(e1) := tgt(e2)
]
```
This is the parallel pair graph and you can see the analogy with the math above. 
We can import instances:

```
instance PathPath : Graph := [
  P1 : PP
  P2 : PP 
  tgt(P1.e2) := src(P2.e1)
]
```
The choices of e1 vs e2 in the equation are arbitrary. These imports are accomplished
via propositional equalities, not the declarative ones that the specialization type 
mechanism for models effectively supports, because an instance is a rich algebraic 
structure (especially once it's modal) and I do not think it's possible to have canonical
names for every element in a glueing of instances as we do for objects of glued models. 
This does mean that identifications for instances are accomplishing less, in the type theory,
and leaving more to computer algebra further down the pipe.

## Implementation
Currently this is implemented in DoubleTT by making an instance a new kind of *term* and 
the fiber over an element of a model a new kind of *type*. An instance term carries 
the payload of the instance's generators, equations, and imported sub-instances (semantically
an import map needn't be injective, though it usually probably will be.) 
These changes to DoubleTT sit a bit uneasily with the comprehension category semantics, 
and I'm not sure whether there's a better way to handle this. But it seems to work well 
enough--we're basically tricking the type checker into imagining a model as a type and an instance
as a term of the type, rather than giving it an understanding of contexts and types over 
contexts explicitly. Possibly the latter is how this should really be treated, but I don't
know whether that's true or if the time for that is now.
## Model generation

`tt:modelgen` builds a `DisreteDblInstance` from an `instance` declaration. This is a 
new data structure matching the "generators and equations" idea from above.

## Questions and to-dos

- Next up and low risk is the notebook elaborator, so we can put these into the app. 
- High priority but higher risk is to get thinking about modal instances. I'm aiming 
  to get these running during in July but somebody will need to write a paper on this.
- As above: are we abusing poor DoubleTT in making it think models are types and instances are
  terms? Is there a low-pain way to be more honest?