packages/automerge-doc-server/README.md, before:

# CatColab document sync server

This package provides the [Automerge](https://automerge.org/) document sync
server for CatColab, written in TypeScript as a thin wrapper around
[`automerge-repo`](https://github.com/automerge/automerge-repo).

It is not very useful on its own and is intended to run in conjunction with the
CatColab [backend](../backend/). See there for more information.

### Updating pnpm Dependencies with Nix
Nix tracks dependencies using a fixed hash. If your pnpm dependencies change, you may encounter an error like:
```
ERR_PNPM_NO_OFFLINE_TARBALL  A package is missing from the store but cannot download it in offline mode.
```

To update the dependencies tracked by Nix:

#### Temporarily replace the hash
Find the line in your Nix file that looks like:
```
hash = "sha256-...";
```

Replace it with:
```
hash = pkgs.lib.fakeHash;
```

#### Re-deploy
Run your deployment command again. Nix will now compute the correct hash and fail with an error message like:
```
error: hash mismatch in fixed-output derivation '/nix/store/xyz-automerge-doc-server-pnpm-deps.drv':
         specified: sha256-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA=
            got:    sha256-tIgtzlslvm2A1UpwfVsYk3E9HkKJntu36gEtsFjswgo=
```

#### Update the hash
Replace pkgs.lib.fakeHash with the actual hash shown in the error message:
```
hash = "sha256-tIgtzlslvm2A1UpwfVsYk3E9HkKJntu36gEtsFjswgo=";
```

Now the dependencies are correctly tracked, and the build should proceed normally. Make sure to include the updated hash in a commit.

Yes, this is the official way of solving this in nix. No, there is no way to automate this with nix. Nix: where developer experience goes to die.


### Frozen lockfile
The error:
```
ERR_PNPM_OUTDATED_LOCKFILE  Cannot install with "frozen-lockfile" because pnpm-lock.yaml is not up to date with <ROOT>/package.json
```

Means that the `package.json` does not match `pnpm-lock.yaml`, mostly likely because you forgot to run forgot to run `pnpm install` after editting `package.json`.

Commit message:

FIX: add missing deps to automerge-doc-server

packages/automerge-doc-server/README.md, after:

# CatColab document sync server

This package provides the [Automerge](https://automerge.org/) document sync
server for CatColab, written in TypeScript as a thin wrapper around
[`automerge-repo`](https://github.com/automerge/automerge-repo).

It is not very useful on its own and is intended to run in conjunction with the
CatColab [backend](../backend/). See there for more information.

### Error: Could not resolve "package"

This error occurs during a Nix build when an imported package is missing from `package.json`. It
typically happens when `package.json` is reset or edited without updating `node_modules`.

To fix this, install the missing packages using `pnpm install`. After doing so, you'll also need to
update `pnpmDeps.hash` in `default.nix`.

### Updating pnpm dependencies with Nix
Nix tracks dependencies using a fixed hash. If your pnpm dependencies change, you may encounter an error like:
```
ERR_PNPM_NO_OFFLINE_TARBALL  A package is missing from the store but cannot download it in offline mode.
```

To update the dependencies tracked by Nix:

#### Temporarily replace the hash
Find the line in your Nix file that looks like:
```
hash = "sha256-...";
```

Replace it with:
```
hash = pkgs.lib.fakeHash;
```

#### Re-deploy or re-build
Run your deployment/build command again. Nix will now compute the correct hash and fail with an error message like:
```
error: hash mismatch in fixed-output derivation '/nix/store/xyz-automerge-doc-server-pnpm-deps.drv':
         specified: sha256-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA=
            got:    sha256-tIgtzlslvm2A1UpwfVsYk3E9HkKJntu36gEtsFjswgo=
```

You can build locally without a deploy with the following commannd:
```
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.catcolab-next.config.system.build.toplevel
```

#### Update the hash
Replace pkgs.lib.fakeHash with the actual hash shown in the error message:
```
hash = "sha256-tIgtzlslvm2A1UpwfVsYk3E9HkKJntu36gEtsFjswgo=";
```

Now the dependencies are correctly tracked, and the build should proceed normally. Make sure to include the updated hash in a commit.

Yes, this is the official way of solving this in nix. No, there is no way to automate this with nix. Nix: where developer experience goes to die.


### Frozen lockfile
The error:
```
ERR_PNPM_OUTDATED_LOCKFILE  Cannot install with "frozen-lockfile" because pnpm-lock.yaml is not up to date with <ROOT>/package.json
```

Means that the `package.json` does not match `pnpm-lock.yaml`, mostly likely because you forgot to run forgot to run `pnpm install` after editting `package.json`.
