packages/frontend/src/help/logic/stock-flow.mdx, before:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";
import { Warning, Question } from "../../components/alert";
import { HelpAnalysisById } from "../logic"

## Description

Stock and flow (or simply *stock-flow*) diagrams are fundamental to systems dynamics.
They provide a rich language, allowing the scientist to model a system of stocks of various quantities and flows between them, with the rate of the flows depending in complex ways on various stocks via *links*.

<Warning>
In CatColab we implement what we call *primitive* stock-flow diagrams, which do not allow for the auxiliary variables permitting flows to be arbitrary functions of the stocks, which is characteristic in systems dynamics.
We expect to implement this richer semantics in the future.
</Warning>


### Examples

- [An SEIRV model](https://catcolab.org/model/0195001d-3c7d-7cb3-9019-2f411cfa2663)


### Further reading

- Wikipedia: [Stock and flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_and_flow)
- Pete Barbrook-Johnson, Alexandra S. Penn, "System Dynamics" in *Systems Mapping* (2022). [DOI:10.1007/978-3-031-01919-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-01919-7)
- John C. Baez, Xiaoyan Li, Sophie Libkind, Nathaniel D. Osgood, Eric Redekopp, "A Categorical Framework for Modeling with Stock and Flow Diagrams", (2023) [arXiv:2211.01290](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01290)


## Instances and analyses

### Instances

<Question>
Instances are not currently supported for stock-flow diagrams, but if you have suggestions for what these might mean to a systems theorist then please do reach out and let us know.
</Question>


### Analyses

<HelpAnalysisById theory={props.theory} analysisId="diagram"/>

<HelpAnalysisById theory={props.theory} analysisId="mass-action">
**TO-DO: write this**
</HelpAnalysisById>

Commit message:

table styling; new (unwritten) guide for schemas

packages/frontend/src/help/logic/stock-flow.mdx, after:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";
import { Warning, Question } from "../../components/alert";
import { HelpAnalysisById } from "../logic"

## Description

**Stock and flow** (or simply **stock-flow**) diagrams are fundamental to systems dynamics.
They provide a rich language, allowing the scientist to model a system of **stocks** of various quantities and flows between them, with the rate of the flows depending in complex ways on various stocks via **links**.

<Warning>
In CatColab we implement what we call **primitive** stock-flow diagrams, which do not allow for the auxiliary variables permitting flows to be arbitrary functions of the stocks, which is characteristic in systems dynamics.
We expect to implement the richer semantics in the future.
</Warning>


### Examples

- [An SEIRV model](https://catcolab.org/model/0195001d-3c7d-7cb3-9019-2f411cfa2663)
- See also the <A href="/help/guides/seirv">Worked example: SEIRV (stock-flow diagrams)</A> guide


### Further reading

- Wikipedia: [Stock and flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_and_flow)
- Pete Barbrook-Johnson, Alexandra S. Penn, "System Dynamics" in *Systems Mapping* (2022). [DOI:10.1007/978-3-031-01919-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-01919-7)
- John C. Baez, Xiaoyan Li, Sophie Libkind, Nathaniel D. Osgood, Eric Redekopp, "A Categorical Framework for Modeling with Stock and Flow Diagrams", (2023) [arXiv:2211.01290](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01290)


## Instances and analyses

### Instances

<Question>
Instances are not currently supported for stock-flow diagrams, but if you have suggestions for what these might mean to a systems theorist then please do reach out and let us know.
</Question>


### Analyses

<HelpAnalysisById theory={props.theory} analysisId="diagram"/>

<HelpAnalysisById theory={props.theory} analysisId="mass-action">
**TO-DO: write this**
</HelpAnalysisById>
