packages/frontend/src/help/logic/unary-dec.mdx, before:

**!TO-DO: rewrite!**

## Description

The unary discrete exterior calculus (DEC) is an implementation of the unary part of 
the *discrete exterior calculus*, an approach to discrete differential geometry due initially
to Anil Hirani. The Topos Institute and collaborators have a substantial DEC library 
called Decapodes implemented in the AlgebraicJulia project. The main purpose of the DEC in
CatColab is to permit the user to build a PDE system via a structure editor which can then 
be solved in Decapodes, with the result animated right inside of CatColab. 

This workflow has been completed in some proofs of concept, but the need to run a Julia kernel
means it's not particularly convenient for non-Julia users at this time. Instructions on 
the process to do so for those who like are available [on GitHub.](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/tree/main/packages/algjulia-service)

## Examples

An inviscid Navier-Stokes [equation](https://catcolab.org/analysis/0194d3b8-087b-7130-9c60-68edceff0848) on the sphere.

## Further reading

- Hirani's [PhD thesis](http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~misha/Fall09/Hirani03.pdf)
- The [Decapodes](https://algebraicjulia.github.io/Decapodes.jl/dev/) documentation has many worked examples using AlgebraicJulia syntax directly

Commit message:

basic rewrites of logic helps

packages/frontend/src/help/logic/unary-dec.mdx, after:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";
import { Question, Warning } from "../../components/alert";

## Description

The unary discrete exterior calculus (DEC) is an implementation of the unary part of the *discrete exterior calculus*, an approach to discrete differential geometry due initially to Anil Hirani.
The Topos Institute and collaborators have a substantial DEC library called [Decapodes](https://algebraicjulia.github.io/Decapodes.jl/dev/) implemented in the AlgebraicJulia project.
The main purpose of the DEC logic in CatColab is to permit the user to build a PDE system via a structure editor which can then be solved in Decapodes, with the result animated right inside of CatColab.

<Warning>
This workflow has been completed in some proofs of concept, but the need to run a Julia kernel means it's not particularly convenient for non-Julia users at this time.
Instructions on the process to do so for those who like are available [on GitHub](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/tree/main/packages/algjulia-service).
</Warning>


## Instances

Instances are not currently supported.


## Analyses

**!TO-DO: include!**


## Examples

- [An inviscid Navier-Stokes equation on the sphere.](https://catcolab.org/analysis/0194d3b8-087b-7130-9c60-68edceff0848)


## Further reading

- Hirani's [PhD thesis](http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~misha/Fall09/Hirani03.pdf)
- The [Decapodes](https://algebraicjulia.github.io/Decapodes.jl/dev/) documentation, for many worked examples directly using AlgebraicJulia syntax
