packages/backend/README.md, before:

# CatColab backend

This directory contains the web server for the CatColab application, written in
Rust using the [`sqlx`](https://github.com/launchbadge/sqlx) bindings for
PostgreSQL and the [`axum`](https://github.com/tokio-rs/axum) web framework.

## Setup

1. Install Rust, say by using [rustup](https://rustup.rs/)
2. Install PostgreSQL
3. Create a new database named `catcolab`
4. Change to this directory: `cd packages/backend`
5. Update the `DATABASE_URL` variable in the file `.env` as needed with your
   database username, password, and port
6. Run the database migrations: `cargo run -p backend migrator apply`
7. Build the backend binary: `cargo build`
8. Run the unit tests: `cargo test`

## Usage

The CatColab backend consists of two services: the main web server (this
package) and the [Automerge document server](../automerge-doc-server). To run
the backend locally, launch the two services by running the following commands
in separate terminals, in any order:

```sh
cd packages/backend
cargo run
```

```sh
cd packages/automerge-doc-server
pnpm run main
```

The backend is now running locally.

To run the integration tests for the RPC API:

```sh
cd packages/frontend
pnpm run test
```

To launch the frontend using the local backend:

```
cd packages/frontend
pnpm run dev
```


## Updating Cargo dependencies

**tl;dr:** Run `crate2nix generate` in the repository root and commit the updated `Cargo.nix` file.

To speed up deployments, [crate2nix](https://nix-community.github.io/crate2nix/) is used to cache the
build artifacts of Rust dependencies. Without it, dependencies would be rebuilt from scratch on every
deployment, significantly increasing build times.

`crate2nix` solves this by generating a `Cargo.nix` file, which describes the full dependency graph of
the project in a reproducible, Nix-compatible format. This file allows Nix to more effectively cache and
reuse dependency builds across deployments.

Whenever you update your `Cargo.toml` or `Cargo.lock` you should regenerate `Cargo.nix` by running the
following commands in the repository root:

```bash
nix develop
crate2nix generate
```

And committing the the updated `Cargo.nix` file.

Don't forget to run `cargo sqlx prepare` in `packages/backend`!


## NixOS

### Test build for NixOS deployment
```
nix flake check --no-sandbox
```

To get a interactive python session in the test environment:
```
nix run .#checks.x86_64-linux.integrationTests.driverInteractive --no-sandbox
```

Commit message:

Document migration authoring and usage

packages/backend/README.md, after:

# CatColab backend

This directory contains the web server for the CatColab application, written in
Rust using the [`sqlx`](https://github.com/launchbadge/sqlx) bindings for
PostgreSQL and the [`axum`](https://github.com/tokio-rs/axum) web framework.

## Setup

1. Install Rust, say by using [rustup](https://rustup.rs/)
2. Install PostgreSQL
3. Create a new database named `catcolab`
4. Change to this directory: `cd packages/backend`
5. Update the `DATABASE_URL` variable in the file `.env` as needed with your
   database username, password, and port
6. Run the database migrations: `cargo run -p backend migrator apply`
7. Build the backend binary: `cargo build`
8. Run the unit tests: `cargo test`

## Usage

The CatColab backend consists of two services: the main web server (this
package) and the [Automerge document server](../automerge-doc-server). To run
the backend locally, launch the two services by running the following commands
in separate terminals, in any order:

```sh
cd packages/backend
cargo run
```

```sh
cd packages/automerge-doc-server
pnpm run main
```

The backend is now running locally.

To run the integration tests for the RPC API:

```sh
cd packages/frontend
pnpm run test
```

To launch the frontend using the local backend:

```
cd packages/frontend
pnpm run dev
```

## Running migrations

This package runs databaes migrations using `migrator` subcommand which uses the
[sqlx_migrator](https://github.com/iamsauravsharma/sqlx_migrator) framework.

### Usage
The migrator tool can be run from any directory using the `cargo run -p backend migrator ...` command.
The migrator tool uses the default CLI interface provided by `sqlx_migrator`, which is very similar to
the `sqlx` CLI.

The `DATABASE_URL` environment variable must be set for the target database. This is typically configured
automatically by the Nix dev shell defined in the repository's `flake.nix`.

To view available commands, run

```sh
cargo run -p backend migrator help
```

To apply all migrations, run

```sh
cargo run -p backend migrator apply
```

## Writing new migrations

For migrations that consist solely of SQL statements, the easiest way to get started is to copy the first
migration file: `src/migrations/m20241004010448_document_refs.rs` and modify it as needed.

Be sure to register your new migration in `src/migrations/mod.rs`.

To generate a timestamp for the migration filename, run:

```sh
date -u +"%Y%m%d%H%M%S"
```

Don't forget to run `cargo sqlx prepare` in `packages/backend` after making schema changes!
