packages/frontend/src/help/credits.mdx, before:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";

# Credits

CatColab is developed by [Topos Institute](https://topos.site/) in partnership
with our collaborators, funders, and contributors from the open source
community.

## Development team

As of January 2025, the core developers of CatColab are
[Kris Brown](https://www.krisb.org/),
[Kevin Carlson](https://topos.institute/people/kevin-carlson/),
[Owen Lynch](https://owenlynch.org/), and
[Evan Patterson](https://www.epatters.org/).

Notable contributions to CatColab have also been made by Matt Cuffaro, Shaowei
Lin, and Hamidah Oderinwale. A [complete
list](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/graphs/contributors) of
contributors is available on GitHub.

## Research

CatColab is not only a technology. It's also an ongoing research project,
drawing on research in mathematics and computer science conducted at Topos
Institute, by our collaborators, in the applied category theory community, and
beyond. An incomplete <A href="/dev/bib-0001.xml">bibliography</A> is available
in the developer docs.

## Funding

Research and development on CatColab is supported by research grants from

- AFOSR Young Investigator Program (YIP), Award FA9550-23-1-0133
- DARPA Automating Scientific Knowledge Extraction and Modeling (ASKEM)
  - Diagrammatic equations and integration with
    [Decapodes.jl](https://github.com/AlgebraicJulia/Decapodes.jl)

and by philanthropic gifts from

- [Survival and Flourishing Fund](https://survivalandflourishing.fund/)
- [GoodForever Foundation](https://www.goodforever.org/foundation)

Commit message:

DOC: Update credits with new funder and team members.

packages/frontend/src/help/credits.mdx, after:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";

# Credits

CatColab is developed by [Topos Institute](https://topos.site/) in partnership
with our collaborators, funders, and contributors from the open source
community.

## Development team

As of July 2025, the core technical team behind CatColab is
[Kevin Carlson](https://topos.institute/people/kevin-carlson/),
[Tim Hosgood](https://thosgood.net/),
[Owen Lynch](https://owenlynch.org/),
[Jason Moggridge](https://github.com/jmoggr), and
[Evan Patterson](https://www.epatters.org/).

Notable contributions to CatColab have also been made by Kris Brown, Matt
Cuffaro, Shaowei Lin, and Hamidah Oderinwale. A [complete
list](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab/graphs/contributors) of
contributors is available on GitHub.

## Research

CatColab is not only a technology. It's also an ongoing research project,
drawing on research in mathematics and computer science conducted at Topos
Institute, by our collaborators, in the applied category theory community, and
beyond. An incomplete <A href="/dev/bib-0001.xml">bibliography</A> is available
in the developer docs.

## Funding

Research and development on CatColab is supported by research grants from

- ARIA [Safeguarded
  AI](https://www.aria.org.uk/opportunity-spaces/mathematics-for-safe-ai/safeguarded-ai/)
- AFOSR Young Investigator Program (YIP), Award FA9550-23-1-0133
- DARPA Automating Scientific Knowledge Extraction and Modeling (ASKEM)
  - Diagrammatic equations and integration with
    [Decapodes.jl](https://github.com/AlgebraicJulia/Decapodes.jl)

and by philanthropic gifts from

- [Survival and Flourishing Fund](https://survivalandflourishing.fund/)
- [GoodForever Foundation](https://www.goodforever.org/foundation)
