packages/frontend/src/help/index.mdx, before:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";
import { Warning } from "../components/alert";

# Help & resources

## CatColab is...

- a collaborative environment for *formal, interoperable, conceptual modeling*
- an open source software project: [find us on
  GitHub](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab)
- a technology created by [Topos Institute](https://topos.site/) and our
  partners: <A href="credits">read the credits</A>

<Warning>
CatColab is under active development with new features added regularly. We aim
to preserve the integrity of your data but you should not store anything
critical or sensitive.
</Warning>

## Concepts

While CatColab has a notebook-style interface inspired by computational
notebooks like JupyterLab and structured document editors like Notion, its
conceptual underpinnings are quite different from both kinds of tools. Here is
an overview of the concepts that you'll encounter in CatColab today.

<dl>

<dt>Logic</dt>

<dd>CatColab is not a general-purpose programming or modeling language but is
rather an extensible environment for working in *domain-specific logics*, such
as those of database schemas or biochemical regulatory networks. To do anything
in the tool besides write text, you'll need to <A href="theories">choose a
logic</A>.</dd>

<dt>Model</dt>

<dd>Models in CatColab are models *within* a logic, such as a particular
database schema or regulatory network. Models are specified declaratively and
are well-defined mathematical objects. CatColab is a structure editor for models
in a logic, allowing formal declarations to be intermixed with descriptive rich
text.</dd>

<dt>Analysis</dt>

<dd>Unlike most computational notebooks, CatColab strictly separates the
*specification* of a model from any outputs derived from it. Depending on the
logic, an analysis of a model might include visualization, simulation,
identification of motifs, and translation into other formats.</dd>

</dl>

Future of versions of CatColab will display the further concepts of
**instances**, **morphisms**, and **migrations**, to be described when they
become available.

Commit message:

Link to quick intro from main help page (#405)
* Demo page

* Add link from main help to demo page

* Make it correct

* remove spurious file

packages/frontend/src/help/index.mdx, after:

import { A } from "@solidjs/router";
import { Warning } from "../components/alert";

# Help & resources

## CatColab is...

- a collaborative environment for *formal, interoperable, conceptual modeling*
- an open source software project: [find us on
  GitHub](https://github.com/ToposInstitute/CatColab)
- a technology created by [Topos Institute](https://topos.site/) and our
  partners: <A href="credits">read the credits</A>

You can find a page with some examples of CatColab in action <A href="quick-intro">here</A>.

<Warning>
CatColab is under active development with new features added regularly. We aim
to preserve the integrity of your data but you should not store anything
critical or sensitive.
</Warning>

## Concepts

While CatColab has a notebook-style interface inspired by computational
notebooks like JupyterLab and structured document editors like Notion, its
conceptual underpinnings are quite different from both kinds of tools. Here is
an overview of the concepts that you'll encounter in CatColab today.

<dl>

<dt>Logic</dt>

<dd>CatColab is not a general-purpose programming or modeling language but is
rather an extensible environment for working in *domain-specific logics*, such
as those of database schemas or biochemical regulatory networks. To do anything
in the tool besides write text, you'll need to <A href="theories">choose a
logic</A>.</dd>

<dt>Model</dt>

<dd>Models in CatColab are models *within* a logic, such as a particular
database schema or regulatory network. Models are specified declaratively and
are well-defined mathematical objects. CatColab is a structure editor for models
in a logic, allowing formal declarations to be intermixed with descriptive rich
text.</dd>

<dt>Analysis</dt>

<dd>Unlike most computational notebooks, CatColab strictly separates the
*specification* of a model from any outputs derived from it. Depending on the
logic, an analysis of a model might include visualization, simulation,
identification of motifs, and translation into other formats.</dd>

</dl>

Future of versions of CatColab will display the further concepts of
**instances**, **morphisms**, and **migrations**, to be described when they
become available.
